articipating
articipating
I N   G O V E R N M E N T
I N   G O V E R N M E N T
Public Opinion

Create a short  questionnaire to find
out how people in your community
feel about government. Ask questions
such as, “Do public officials care
about what people like you think? 
Yes or no?” After tabulating the 
survey results, draw a circle graph
that portrays public attitudes and 
display the graphs in class.

2

Independence Hall

Take a virtual tour of Independence Hall in Philadel-

phia, where the Continental Congress met and founded the
United States of America. 

Glencoe’s Democracy in Action 
Video Program

Independence Hall, or
the Old State House, was
the birthplace of both the 
Declaration of Independence
and the U.S. Constitution.
The Democracy in Action
video program “Indepen-
dence Hall” shows the
unique role of Independence
Hall in American history. 
As you view the video

program, try to identify
some of the people 
involved in framing the
United States govern-
ment.

Hands-On Activity

Use your school’s computerized card cata-
log or the Internet to research additional infor-
mation about the historical significance of
Independence Hall. How did its location con-
tribute to the events that unfolded there? Using
multimedia tools or software, create a multimedia presentation
about the role of Independence Hall during the early years of
our nation. Incorporate images from the Internet. 

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

▲ The first die for 
the Great Seal of 
the United States   
and the larger die 
of the Old Treaty 
Seal, used to 
make pendant 
seals for 
American 
treaties

People and Government Around
the world, people live under a variety
of governments. Are governments 
necessary? How well do governments
serve people? Chapter 1 will explain
the basic forms of government so that
you can answer these questions.

To better understand the
foundations of government
and their impact on your life, view the
Democracy in Action Chapter 1 video
lesson: 

Government and Our Lives

★       ★       ★       ★       ★       ★       ★       ★       ★       ★

GOVERNMENT

Chapter Overview Visit the United States
Government: Democracy in Action Web site
at gov.glencoe.com and click on Chapter
1–Overview to preview chapter information.

4

S e c t i on   1
S e c t i on   1

Principles of Government

Reader’s Guide

Key Terms
state, nation, nation-state, consensus, 
sovereignty, government, social contract
Find Out 
■ What are the four main purposes of government?
■ How do various theories explain the origin of

government? 

Understanding Concepts
Public Policy Which policies of the government
make your life better? Which do you think make
life worse?

Teens Get the Vote 

WASHINGTON, D.C., JUNE 30, 1971 

Several  states  jockeyed

today  to  become  the
38th  state  to  ratify  the
Twenty-sixth Amendment
to the Constitution, which
lowers  the  voting  age  to
18. Ohio  seems  to  have
won  the  contest; its  legis-
lature  voted  approval  in  a
rare evening meeting. This
surprise  move  deprived
Oklahoma  of the  honor; its  legislature  was  not  in
session. Also  thwarted  was  North  Carolina, which
approved  the  amendment  earlier  today  but  delayed
official  ratification  until  tomorrow  morning. Pro-
posed  by  Congress  on  March  23, no  other  amend-
ment  has  won  such  rapid  approval. The  old  record
was  just  over  six  months  in  1804  for  the  Twelfth
Amendment.

A teen’s first vote

In 1972, for the first time, many 18-year-olds

were allowed to vote. Perhaps waiting in line
to vote allowed time for reflection. Why am I
doing this? Will it make a difference? Is gov-
ernment really necessary? What does government
have to do with my life?

While most of us realize that government is
necessary, people have asked basic questions about
the institution of government for centuries. What
is the proper function of government? What form
of government serves best? Where or why did gov-
ernment originate? Many scholars have written
much about these issues. This text will help answer
some of these basic questions.

The State

Aristotle, a scholar in ancient Greece, was
one of the first students of government. He
studied  the  polis, the  ancient  Greek  city-state.
Many terms and concepts of government, such as
politics, democracy, and republic, originated in an-
cient Greece and Rome.

The  familiar  terms  country and  state  have 
basically  the  same  meaning. The  word  state
comes  from  a  form  of the  Latin  word  stare,
meaning “to stand.” Today the word state pre-
cisely identifies a political community that occu-
pies a definite territory and has an organized
government with the power to make and enforce
laws without approval from any higher authori-
ty. The United States is one of close to 200 states
in the world today.

To citizens of the United States, the term
state sometimes has a different meaning. The
name United States was first used in 1776 when
the thirteen British colonies became states by
declaring  their  independence. At  that  time,
each state thought of itself as a country. Even
though the states later joined together as one
nation under the Constitution, the term state
continued to be used to describe the main po-
litical units within the United States.

▲

Fourth of July parade

CHAPTER 1: PEOPLE AND GOVERNMENT 5

Changing Population and State Power

▲

Past Between 1941 and 1945 more than
700,000 African Americans moved from one
part of the United States to another seeking
opportunity.

Present As people seek a better life, the
population of the United States changes,
sometimes straining existing facilities, as 
illustrated in this overcrowded classroom in
San Antonio, Texas.
▲

Political Processes
How does a shifting
population affect the
power of each of the
states? 

The term nation is often used to describe an
independent state or country. Strictly speaking,
however, a nation is any sizable group of people
who are united by common bonds of race, lan-
guage, custom, tradition, and, sometimes, religion.
Usually the territorial boundaries of modern states
and those of nations are the same. For example,
although not all citizens of France are of French
descent, the territories of both the nation of France
and the state of France coincide. The term nation-
state is often used to describe such a country.

Not all groups that consider themselves to be
nations  have  their  own  states. Eastern  Canada,
for  example,
includes  many  French-speaking
Catholics who prefer to follow French culture and
traditions rather than those of the English-speak-
ing  non-Catholic  majority  of Canada. Some  of
these people want to break away from Canada and
establish their own state. On the other hand, in
Africa the populations of some national groups are
divided among several African states, the result of
artificial borders established during the colonial
era. The popular use of the term nation, however,
fits the standard definition of state. For this rea-
son this text will use the terms state and nation
interchangeably.

6 CHAPTER 1: PEOPLE AND GOVERNMENT

Essential Features of a State

The  states  that  make  up  today’s  political
world share four essential features: popula-

tion, territory, sovereignty, and government.
Population The most obvious essential for a
state is people. The nature of a state’s population
affects its stability. States where the population
shares a general political and social consensus,
or agreement about basic beliefs, have the most
stable governments. For example, most Americans
share basic beliefs about the value of democratic
government.

Another way that population affects the polit-
ical organization of a state is through its mobility.
Millions  of Americans  change  residences  each
year. As a result, political power is slowly changing
and being modified. A major shift in population
from the North and East to the South and West
caused Southern and Western states to gain repre-
sentatives in Congress based on the census, while
some states in the North and East lost representa-
tion. The movement of some of the population
from inner cities to suburban areas resulted in a
similar shift in political power.

Territory A  state  has  established  boundaries.
The United States’s continental boundaries are the
Atlantic and Pacific Oceans and recognized borders
with Canada and Mexico.

The exact location or shape of political bound-
aries is often a source of conflict among states. Ter-
ritorial boundaries may change as a result of war,
negotiations, or  purchase. The  territory  of the
United States, like that of some other states, has
grown  considerably  since  the  original  thirteen
states declared their independence. By purchase,
negotiation, and war the United States extended its
territory to the shores of the Pacific Ocean.

Sovereignty The key characteristic of a state is
its sovereignty. Political sovereignty means that the
state has supreme and absolute authority within its
territorial boundaries. It has complete indepen-
dence, and complete power to make laws, shape
foreign policy, and determine its own course of ac-
tion. In theory, at least, no state has the right to in-
terfere with the internal affairs of another state.

Because every state is considered sovereign,
every state is equal with respect to legal rights and
duties—at least in theory. In practice, of course,
states with great economic strength and military
capabilities have more power than other states.

United States Acquisitions
United States Acquisitions

Territory or Accession

Date

1 Original 13 

 Colonies

Territory in 1790

  —

  —

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

Louisiana Purchase

1803

Red River Basin

Florida

Texas

Oregon

Mexican Cession

1818

1819

1845

1846

1848

Gadsden Purchase

1853

12

14

10

11

18

15

N

4

3

6

7

8

9

1

13

17

2

5

16

10

Alaska

11

Hawaii

12

Philippines

13

 Puerto Rico

14

Guam

15

16

17

18

American Samoa

Panama Canal 
 Zone

Virgin Islands

Trust Territory of
Pacific Islands

1867

1898

1898

1899

1899

1900

1904

1917

1947

Philippines 

The Philippines was 
granted independence 
in 1946.

0

0

1500 miles

1500 kilometers

Panama
Canal Zone

By treaty, Panama 
gained control of the 
Panama Canal on 
December 31, 1999.

Critical Thinking
                            The Treaty of Paris, which ended the Revolutionary War, established the original 
boundaries of the United States. Why do you think the United States acquired so many territories 
in the South Pacific?

CHAPTER 1: PEOPLE AND GOVERNMENT 7

Government Every state has some form of gov-
ernment. Government is the institution through
which the state maintains social order, provides
public  services, and  enforces  decisions  that  are
binding on all people living within the state.

Theories of the Origin 
of the State

Thomas Hobbes
(above) and
John Locke
(right)

How did the state, or
government, come
to be? No one knows pre-
cisely  how  or  why  people
created the earliest govern-
ments. Many scholars have
constructed  theories  that
attempt to explain the ori-
gin of the state.
Evolutionary  Theory
Some scholars believe that
the state evolved from the
family. This is the basis of
the  evolutionary  theory
of government origin. The
head of the primitive fam-
ily was the authority that
served  as  a  government.
An extended family might include hun-
dreds of people. Abraham’s descendants
in the Old Testament of the Bible are an
example of the emergence of this kind of
rule. Gradually the large, extended family
needed more organization.
Force Theory In the earliest civilizations, peo-
ple worked together to build walled cities, control
floods, and construct buildings for worship. They
also cooperated in other ways. Leaders issued de-
crees and soldiers went to war to protect their city.
Some scholars believe that the state was born of
force. The  force  theory says  that  government
emerged  when  all  the  people  of an  area  were
brought under the authority of one person or group.
Divine Right Theory The notion that a god or
gods have chosen certain people to rule by divine
right has been important in many civilizations. The
Egyptians, Chinese, and Aztec were among those

8 CHAPTER 1: PEOPLE AND GOVERNMENT

who believed that their rulers were either descen-
dants of gods or at least chosen by gods. By the
middle of the 1600s in Europe, monarchs often 
referred to their right to rule as coming from God.
People believed that the state was created by God,
and those who were born to royalty were chosen 
by God to govern. To oppose the monarch was to
oppose God and was considered both treason

and sin.

Social Contract Theory Beginning
in the 1600s, Europeans challenged the
rule of sovereigns who ruled by divine
right. They were often supported by
the  writings  of philosophers  who 
believed that the origin of the state
was  in  a  social  contract. Thomas
Hobbes in England was one of the
first to theorize on the social contract.
He wrote that in a “state of na-
ture,” no government existed.
Without  an  authority  to
protect people from one
another, life was “nasty,
brutish, and short.” By
contract, people  sur-
rendered to the state
the power needed to
maintain  order. The
state, in  turn, agreed
to protect its citizens.
Hobbes  believed  that
people  did  not  have 
the  right  to  break  this

agreement.
John Locke took the social
contract a step further. In 1688 the
British Parliament forced King James II out of office
and invited William and Mary of Orange to rule.
Locke defended Parliament’s overthrow of the king.
He wrote that people were naturally endowed with
the right to life, liberty, and property. To preserve
their rights, they willingly contracted to give power
to a governing authority. When government failed
to preserve the rights of the people, the people had
the right to break the contract.

Nearly a century later, the American colonies
revolted against King George III. In declaring their
independence, they cited the political philosophy
of natural rights that Locke had written.

The Purposes of Government

Today  governments  serve  several  major
purposes for the state: (1) to maintain social
order; (2) to provide public services; (3) to provide
for national security and a common defense; and
(4) to provide for and control the economic sys-
tem. In carrying out these tasks, governments must
make decisions that are binding on all citizens of
the state. Government has the authority to require
all  individuals  to  obey  these  decisions  and  the
power to punish those who do not obey them.

The decisions of government are authorita-
tive—that is, they can be enforced upon all of soci-
ety. Governments derive their authority from two
sources—their legitimacy and their ability to use
coercive force. Legitimacy means the willingness of
citizens  to  obey  the  government. In  democratic
countries legitimacy is based on the consent of the
people. Americans understand that if their elected
officials fail to respond to the interests of the peo-
ple, they can be voted out of office. Therefore, the
people entrust their government with power.

Coercive force, the second source of govern-
ment authority, derives from the police, judicial,

Government in Daily Life

G overnment is much closer than the 

officials working in Washington, your state
capital, or even city hall. Many things that
Americans take for granted result from services
and protections offered by government.

The roads on which you drive are constructed
and maintained by state and/or local governments.
Traffic laws dictate how you drive on those roads.
When you go to the store, government regulations
make it likely that the groceries you buy will not
poison you. Your hair stylist and dentist are
expected to be skilled professionals because gov-
ernment licenses these and other businesses and
sets minimum standards. Turn on your radio or 
TV. The program you receive will be clear because
government prevents stations from interfering with
each other’s signals. All in all, the presence of gov-
ernment in daily life is greater than you may think.

and military institutions of government. Govern-
ment can force people to pay taxes and can punish
offenders by fines or imprisonment.
Maintaining Social Order John Locke, writ-
ing in Two Treatises of Government 1 in 1690, ex-
plained:

“Men being, as has been said, by Nature, all

free, equal and independent, no one can be
put out of this Estate, and subjected to the
Political Power of another, without his
own Consent. The only way whereby any
one divests himself of his Natural Liberty,
and puts on the bonds of Civil Society is by
agreeing with other Men to joyn [join]

and unite into a Community. . . .”

—John Locke, 1690

According to the social contract theory, people
need government to maintain social order because
they have not yet discovered a way to live in groups

See the following footnoted materials in the Reference Handbook:
1. Two Treatises of Government, page 806. 

Ensuring 
traffic 
safety

articipating
articipating

I N   G O V E R N M E N T  
I N   G O V E R N M E N T  

A C T I V I T Y
A C T I V I T Y

Solving Problems Assume you serve on your 
city council. A group of citizens has petitioned
the city to change the speed limit on all nonresi-
dential streets from 35 mph to 50 mph. Brain-
storm the advantages and disadvantages of each
alternative and how it would impact citizens.
Recommend what speed limit should be in effect
and why.

9

Providing Public Services Abraham Lin-
coln identified one purpose of government:

“The legitimate object of government is to

do for a community of people whatever
they need to have done but cannot do at
all, or cannot so well do for themselves in
their separate and individual capacities.
But in all that people can individually 
do for themselves, government ought not

to interfere.” —Abraham Lincoln, 1854

One of the important purposes of government
is to provide essential services that make communi-
ty life possible and promote the general welfare.
Governments undertake projects, such as building
sewer systems, that individuals could not or would
not do on their own.

Governments also provide an essential service
by making and enforcing laws that promote public
health and safety. Government inspectors check
meat and produce to prevent the sale of spoiled
food. State legislators pass laws that require people
to pass a driving test.
Providing National Security A third task of
government is to protect the people against attack
by other states or from threats such as terrorism.
Protecting its national security is a major concern
of each sovereign state. In today’s world of nuclear
weapons, spy satellites, international terrorists, and
huge armies, the job of providing for the defense
and security of the state is complex.

In addition to protecting the nation from at-
tack, government handles normal relations with
other  nations. The  United  States  Constitution
gives our national government a monopoly over
our nation’s dealings with foreign countries. Thus,
our national government has the exclusive power
to make treaties with other nations. Government
helps to provide economic security by enacting

GOVERNMENT

Student Web Activity Visit the United States
Government: Democracy in Action Web site at
gov.glencoe.com and click on Chapter 1–Student
Web Activities for an activity about principles of
government.

Lucky 13 Benjamin Franklin, John Adams,
and Thomas Jefferson all helped create the
Great Seal of the United States. After working
on the design for six years, they completed
their task on June 20, 1782. Much of the
seal’s symbolism is tied to 
the number 13, the number 
of original states. On the 
seal are 13 stars in the 
crest over the eagle, 13 
stripes on the shield, 13 
arrows in the eagle’s left 
claw, 13 olives and leaves in 
its right claw, and 13 letters in the seal’s
motto, E Pluribus Unum (“Out of Many, One”).
On the back of the seal are a pyramid with 
13 steps and another 13-letter motto, Annuit
Coeptis (“Providence Favors Our Undertakings”).

without conflict. There are many sources of con-
flict in any group. Two people may argue over the
boundary line between their properties. Members
of a community may disagree about what is best
for the group. In any group, some members may
try to take unfair advantage of others. Conflict
seems to be an inescapable part of group life.

Governments provide ways of resolving con-
flicts among group members, helping to maintain
social order. Governments have the power to make
and enforce laws. Governments can require people
to do things they might not do voluntarily, such as
pay taxes or serve in the army. Governments also
provide structures such as courts to help people re-
solve disagreements in an orderly manner.

Without government, civilized life would not
be possible. Government controls and contains
conflict between people by placing limits on what
individuals are permitted to do. Government pro-
vides a group with law and order. An effective gov-
ernment allows citizens to plan for the future, get
an education, raise a family, and live orderly lives.

10 CHAPTER 1: PEOPLE AND GOVERNMENT

Governments do not in-
tervene  only  in  domestic
crises. They  may  intervene 
in  the  economic  affairs  of
another nation. For example,
after World War II, the United
States aided nations in which
it believed economic condi-
tions might foster Commu-
nist revolutions.

Governments  pass  the
laws that shape the economic
environment  of the  nation.
These laws could be as lim-
ited as providing a national
currency  or  as  extensive  as
controlling every individual’s
economic decisions.

The government enforces laws that 
protect the public safety and health. 

Governments also may
make choices that distribute
benefits and public services
among citizens. For example,
the  government  can  make
payments  to  farmers  who
raise certain crops or allow
tax advantages to certain in-
dustries. The government’s decision to build a vet-
erans’ hospital in a certain town benefits some of the
people and not others. Governments usually try to
stimulate economic growth and stability through
controlling inflation, encouraging trade, and regu-
lating the development of natural resources.

trade  agreements  with
other countries. Some state
governments maintain in-
formal  relations  with  for-
eign governments for trade
and cultural purposes. The
national government, how-
ever, has the power to limit
these arrangements.

Making 
Economic 
Decisions Nations vary
greatly  in  their  ability  to
provide their citizens with
economic opportunities or
resources. No country pro-
vides its citizens with every-
thing  they  need  or  desire.
Even  in  a  wealthy  country
like the United States, many
people  are  poorly  clothed,
housed, and fed. The prob-
lem of scarcity is far greater
in  many  other  nations
around the world.

Material scarcity is often

the cause of conflict in society. Countries in which the
gap between rich and poor is great may experience civil
unrest. Historically this has been the primary cause of
several full-blown revolutions. For this reason govern-
ments often use their power to reduce the cause of such
conflict by intervening in the economic system.

Section  1 Assessment
Section  1 Assessment

Checking for Understanding
1. Main Idea In a graphic organizer similar to the
one below, identify four major purposes of gov-
ernment and give an example of each.
Example

Purpose

Critical Thinking
5. Making Comparisons Thomas Hobbes and John
Locke both subscribed to the social contract the-
ory of government. Analyze their views of that
theory.

2. Define state, nation, nation-state, consensus,

sovereignty, government, social contract.

3. Identify Aristotle, Thomas Hobbes, John Locke.
4. Summarize the divine right and social contract

theories.

Public Policy Read news articles concerning
decisions made by foreign governments. 
Classify those decisions that you believe are
making life better for their citizens and those
you believe are making life worse. 

CHAPTER 1: PEOPLE AND GOVERNMENT 11

S e c t i on   2
S e c t i on   2

The Formation of Governments
The government of each nation has unique

Reader’s Guide

characteristics  derived  from  how  that
nation developed. To carry out their func-
tions, governments  are  organized  in  a
variety of ways. Most large countries have several
different  levels  of government. These  usually
include a central or national government as well as
the governments of smaller divisions within the
country, such as provinces, states, counties, cities,
towns, and villages.

Government Systems

The relationship between a nation’s national
government  and  its  smaller  governmental
divisions can be described as either unitary or federal.
Unitary System A unitary system of govern-
ment gives all key powers to the national or central
government. This does not mean that only one
level of government exists. Rather, it means that
the central government has the power to create
state, provincial, or other local governments and
may give them limited sovereignty. Great Britain,
Italy, and France developed unitary governments
as these nations emerged from smaller kingdoms.
Federal System A federal system of govern-
ment divides the powers of government between
the national government and state or provincial
governments. Each level of government has sov-
ereignty in some areas. The United States devel-
oped a federal system after the thirteen colonies 
became states.

To begin with, the United States formed a
confederacy, a  loose  union  of independent
states. When the confederacy failed to provide
an effective national government, the Constitu-
tion made the national government supreme
while preserving some state government pow-
ers. Today, other countries with federal systems
include  Canada, Switzerland, Mexico, Aus-
tralia, India, and Russia.

Key Terms
unitary system, federal system, confederacy, 
constitution, constitutional government, preamble,
constitutional law, politics, industrialized nation,
developing nation
Find Out
■ What are the similarities and differences

between a unitary government and a federal
government system?

■ What are the main purposes of a constitution? 
Understanding Concepts
Global Perspectives The United States Constitu-
tion is the oldest written constitution still in use.
What does this imply about the stability of govern-
ments in the world?

Debates Rage On

RICHMOND, VIRGINIA, 1788

The  proposed  national 

constitution, written last
summer  in  Philadelphia, is
controversy
stirring 
throughout  the  state. Al-
though  it  is  based  on  a 
design  developed  by  Vir-
ginians, many  state  leaders
believe  the planned  govern-
ment  is  too  strong. “It  squints
toward  monarchy,” says  for-
mer  governor Patrick Henry.
James  Madison, a  leading  Virginia  delegate  at
Philadelphia, defends  the  convention’s  work. He
asks, “What is government itself but the greatest of all
reflections  on  human  nature?  If men  were  angels,”
he observes, “no government would be necessary.”

Patrick Henry

12 CHAPTER 1: PEOPLE AND GOVERNMENT

Constitutions and Government
A constitution is a plan that provides the
rules for government. A constitution serves
several major purposes. (l) It sets out ideals that
the people bound by the constitution believe in
and share. (2) It establishes the basic structure of
government and defines the government’s powers
and duties. (3) It provides the supreme law for 
the country. Constitutions provide rules that shape
the  actions  of government  and  politics, much 
as the rules of basketball define the action in a 
basketball game.

serving 

a  nation 

Constitutions may be written or unwritten;
however, in most modern states, constitutions are
written. The United States Constitution, drawn
up in 1787, is the oldest written constitution
still 
today. Other 
nations with written constitutions include France,
Kenya, India, Italy, and  Switzerland. Great
Britain, on the other hand, has an un-
written  constitution  based  on  hun-
dreds  of years  of legislative  acts,
court decisions, and customs.
All  governments  have  a
constitution  in  the  sense  that
they have some plan for organiz-
ing and operating the government. In this sense
the People’s Republic of China has a constitution.
The term constitutional government, however,
has a special meaning. It refers to a government in
which a constitution has authority to place clearly
recognized limits on the powers of those who gov-
ern. Thus, constitutional government is limited
government. Despite  the  existence  of a  written
constitution, the People’s Republic of China does
not have constitutional government. In that coun-
try, there are few limits on the power of the gov-
ernment.
Incomplete Guides Constitutions themselves
are  important  but  incomplete  guides  to  how  a
country is actually governed. They are incomplete
for two reasons. First, no written constitution by
itself can possibly spell out all the laws, customs,
and ideas that grow up around the document it-
self. In  the  United  States, for  example, until
Franklin D. Roosevelt was elected president four
times, it was custom, rather than law, that no per-
son should be elected president more than twice.

First page of the Constitution
(above) and inkwell used to
sign the Constitution

Only when the Twenty-second Amendment
went into effect was a president limited by law to
two elected terms.

Second, a constitution does not always reflect
the actual practice of government in a country.
The People’s Republic of China, for example, has a
written constitution filled with statements about
the basic rights, freedoms, and duties of citizens.
Yet, for years the Chinese government has main-
tained an extensive police force to spy on Chinese
citizens and punish those whose ideas are not ac-
ceptable to the state. Although the government re-
laxed  some  restrictions  in  the 
late  1980s,
authorities crushed a pro-democracy movement
in 1989.
A Statement of Goals Most constitutions
contain a statement that sets forth the goals and
purposes to be served by the government. This
statement is usually called the preamble. The Pre-
amble to the United States Constitution states the
major goals of American government:

CHAPTER 1: PEOPLE AND GOVERNMENT 13

Breaking Precedent

Constitutional Interpreta-
tions Wendell Lewis Willkie
became the Republican nomi-
nee for president in 1940
when Franklin D. Roosevelt
ran for an unprecedented
third term. Roosevelt violated
George Washington’s prece-
dent that limited presidents
to two terms. How did
George Washington’s
precedent reflect the idea
of limited government?

“We, the people of the United States, in Order

to form a more perfect Union, establish 
Justice, insure domestic Tranquility, provide
for the common defence [defense], promote
the general Welfare, and secure the Blessings
of Liberty to ourselves and our Posterity,
do ordain and establish this Constitution

for the United States of America.”

—Preamble to the Constitution, 1787
A Framework for Government The main
body of a constitution sets out the plan for gov-
ernment. In  federal  states, such  as  the  United
States, the constitution also describes the relation-
ship between the national government and state
governments. Most written constitutions also de-
scribe the procedure for amending, or changing,
the constitution.

The main body of a constitution is usually di-
vided into parts called articles and sections. The
United States Constitution has 7 articles contain-
ing a total of 21 sections. The French constitution
has 89 articles grouped under 16 titles. The Indian
constitution, the longest in the world, consists of
hundreds of articles.
The Highest Law Constitutions provide the
supreme law for states. A constitution is usually 
accepted  as  a  superior, morally  binding  force.
It  draws  its  authority  from  the  people  or  from 
a special assembly chosen by the people to create
the constitution. Constitutional law involves the
interpretation and application of the constitution.

14 CHAPTER 1: PEOPLE AND GOVERNMENT

Thus, constitutional law primarily concerns defin-
ing the extent and limits of government power and
the rights of citizens.

Politics and Government

The effort to control or influence the con-
duct and policies of government is called
politics. The Constitution did not prevent the de-
velopment of politics because politics and govern-
ment are closely related. In fact, a major political
struggle  developed  over  the  ratification  of the
Constitution itself. Within a few years major polit-
ical parties played key roles in elections.

People are taking part in politics when they
join a citizens’ group protesting higher taxes or
when they meet with the mayor to ask the city to
repave the streets in their neighborhood. Legisla-
tors are acting politically when they vote to have
government buildings constructed in the districts
they represent.
Seeking Government Benefits Participa-
tion in politics arises because people realize that
government has the potential to influence their
lives in many ways. Different people make different
demands on government. Construction workers
may want government to support the building of
new highways to create jobs. Conservationists may
want the government to spend its money on mass
transit and public parks instead. Still other people,
who favor lower taxes, may want neither the new
highways nor more public parks.

In a large, diverse nation like the United States,
there is a continual struggle over what benefits and
services government should provide, how much
they should cost, and who should pay for them.
Through politics, individuals and groups seek to
maximize the benefits they get from government
while they try to reduce the costs of these benefits.
Through politics, people also seek to use govern-
ment to turn their values and beliefs into public
policy. One group, for example, tries to influence
government  to  ban  smoking  in  public  places.
Other people pressure government not to restrict
smoking in any way.
Importance  of  Politics Through  politics,
conflicts in society are managed. As people seek re-
wards and benefits, politics provides a peaceful
way for them to compete with one another. The
outcomes of politics—the struggle to control gov-
ernment—affect such key matters as the quality of
air and water, economic conditions, peace and war,
and the extent of citizens’ rights and freedoms.
Special Interests The Constitution says that
government should promote the general welfare.
The Framers believed government should operate

in the interests of all the people, not favoring any
special group or person. One of the issues that
concerned the Framers of the United States Con-
stitution was the possibility that groups of people,
united by special political interests, would hinder
the  launching  of the  new  government. James
Madison explained his concerns in a series of arti-
cles called The Federalist:

“Among the numerous advantages promised

by a well-constructed Union. . . [is] its ten-
dency to break and control the violence 
of faction. . . . By a faction, I understand 
a number of citizens . . . who are united
and actuated [moved] by some common
impulse of passion, or of interest, adverse
to the rights of other citizens, or to the 
permanent and aggregate interests of

the community. . . .”—James Madison, 1787

Some people equate politics with bribery or
corruption. They believe the general welfare may
be  sacrificed  to  the  desires  of a  special-interest
group. The misuse of politics, however, should not
obscure the value of a political system.

Making a Difference Laura Epstein did not plan to

stir her community to action
when she spent the summer

Making a Difference

Laura Epstein

of 1996 with a paint brush. She
and eight other young people 
only wanted to paint over graffiti-
covered walls to help beautify
downtown Seattle.   

Working with Seattle’s waste
department, Laura and her team
painted murals on many of the
city’s graffiti-covered walls. Volun-
teers helped decorate one of the
park walls, once a graffiti eyesore,
with giant bugs.

Laura was surprised when

the graffiti-erasing campaign
turned into a creative project
for the community and the chil-
dren in the neighborhood. “That
was the best part—having the

neighbor kids help us paint and
get involved,” she said. Laura
feels she has contributed to the
neighborhood by leaving behind
something that neighborhood 
kids can point to and say, “Hey, 
I helped make that!”

The antigraffiti project is just
one of hundreds of projects being
carried out by youth teams across
the nation who are members of
the Youth Volunteer Corps of
America (YVCA). The YVCA is a
project funded by the federal 
government that gives young peo-
ple a way to get involved in their
communities. According to Bill
Barrett, who works for the nation-
al program, “People who serve
others are providing the solutions
to our country’s problems.”

CHAPTER 1: PEOPLE AND GOVERNMENT 15

Destruction and Development

Southeast Asia are developing nations.
Between  these  two  levels  of nations
are many newly industrialized nations
such as Mexico, South Korea, Singapore,
Malaysia, Algeria, and Kenya.

Growing  Interdependence Al-
though each state is sovereign, nations
today exist in a world of global interde-
pendence. This means that people and
nations must interact or depend upon
one another, especially economically and
politically. It also means that what hap-
pens in one nation or area of the world
affects  what  happens  in  other  places.
Thus, our lives can be directly impacted
not only by the decisions of foreign gov-
ernments but also by the combined effect
of billions of individual choices made by
people across the world.

Global interdependence is increas-
ing due to growing industrialization and
rapid technological advances in manu-
facturing, transportation and telecom-
munications. In  communications, the
development  of the  Internet  and  the
World Wide Web is linking billions of
people and organizations across the globe. In the near
future, half the world’s population will have access to
the Web.

Inequalities Among Countries Nations must cooperate
to solve worldwide concerns. Today the increasing demands
for natural resources threaten many tropical rain forests, like
this one in South America. What tensions do you think
occur between developing nations and industrialized 
nations over the destruction of the rain forests? 

Governing in a 
Complex World

The  United  States  government  conducts
policy in a complex world. Changing rela-
tionships challenge the policies of every nation. It is
not easy to define the boundaries of government.
Major Inequalities Among States Because
of great  inequalities  among  countries, the  world
today is full of contrasts. The United States and about
20 other states, such as Japan, Canada, Australia, and
France, are industrialized nations. Industrialized na-
tions have generally large industries and advanced
technology that provide a more comfortable way of
life than developing nations do. Developing nations
are only beginning to develop industrially. More than
100 developing nations have average per capita, or
per person, incomes that are a fraction of those of in-
dustrialized nations. In the poorest countries, starva-
tion, disease, and political turmoil are a way of life.
Many  states  of Africa  south  of the  Sahara  and  of

Global interdependence is affecting highly devel-
oped as well as developing states. Canada, Mexico,
and the United States are developing greater eco-
nomic, political, and social ties through the North
American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA), signed in
1993. At the same time, many developing states have
become very dependent on the industrialized ones
for economic aid, medical supplies and services, fi-
nancial investment, assistance to cope with natural
disasters, and military aid.

Nonstate  International  Groups Today’s
world is also home to nonstate groups that play a role
in international politics. Some of these groups, such
as terrorist groups and national liberation organiza-
tions, are politically motivated and often use violence
to achieve their goals. Multinational corporations
and international organizations are aimed at devel-
oping economic growth and making profits.

16 CHAPTER 1: PEOPLE AND GOVERNMENT

In recent decades, quasi-military organizations
that use terrorism to gain their objectives have grown
in international influence. Al-Qaeda, the group that
staged  the  September  11, 2001, terrorist  strikes
against the United States, is one example. Al-Qaeda is
composed mostly of Islamic radicals drawn largely
from Middle Eastern countries. It operates on a glob-
al scale with a large budget and holds training centers
in a number of countries around the world.

National liberation organizations aim to estab-
lish an independent state for a particular ethnic or re-
ligious group. The Irish Republican Army (IRA) is
one example of a nationalist organization. The aim of
the IRA is to integrate Ireland and Northern Ireland
into a single country under one Irish government.
The  Palestinian  Liberation  Organization  (PLO)
claims to represent all Palestinians struggling to gain
territory within the state of Israel as their own na-
tional homeland.

Multinational corporations are huge companies
with offices and factories in many countries. The
biggest of these firms have come to be called “state-
less”corporations because they are so international in
ownership, management, workforce, and areas of op-
erations that it is impossible to identify them with any
single nation.

International organizations, such as the World
Trade Organization (WTO), are composed of many
nations  working  together  for  common  goals.
The WTO, for example, seeks to improve economic
development around the world. While they do not

have political sovereignty, they do carry out their ac-
tivities on a global scale, selling their products world-
wide  and  entering  into  agreements  with  foreign
governments. Thus, multinational corporations in-
fluence international politics and the internal deci-
sions  of their  host  countries. Richard  Holder,
president of Reynolds Metals Company, explained
that a global company is one that 

“. . . operates as a worldwide, integrated

system in which all operations, wherever
they may be, are interdependent in terms
of operations and strategies. Every decision
. . . is considered in the light of a world-

wide system.”—Richard Holder, October 1989

General  Motors, American  Telephone  and
Telegraph, Unilever, Nabisco, British Petroleum,
Royal Dutch/Shell, Mitsubishi, and Sony are exam-
ples  of global  corporations  that  have  attained
worldwide economic importance.

Finally, the modern world includes many in-
ternational  organizations. These  groups  range
from the United Nations (UN) to more specialized
organizations  such  as  the  International  Sugar
Council and the Universal Postal Union. These orga-
nizations undertake a wide variety of tasks, often to
serve the needs of member states. The World Me-
teorological Organization, for example, facilitates
the exchange of weather information among states.

Section 2 Assessment
Section 2 Assessment
Section  2 Assessment
Section 2 Assessment

Checking for Understanding
1. Main Idea In a Venn diagram like the one below

right, show the similarities and 
differences between a consti-
tutional  government  and  a
government that merely has
a constitution.

2. Define unitary system, federal

Constitutional
Government

Government

with a 

Constitution

system, confederacy, constitution, constitutional
government, preamble, constitutional law, poli-
tics, industrialized nation, developing nation.

3. Identify The Federalist.
4. Analyze how events in the Middle East illustrate

economic interdependence.

Critical Thinking
5. Analyzing Information James Madison wanted
to prevent “factions,” or special interest groups.
Would it be possible to have government without
interest groups? Explain.

Global Perspectives Choose five foreign na-
tions and find out about each nation’s basic
structure of government. When was its consti-
tution adopted? Is the government democrat-
ic? Obtain information from a local library or 
on the Internet. 

CHAPTER 1: PEOPLE AND GOVERNMENT 17

S e c t i on   3
S e c t i on   3

Types of Government

Reader’s Guide

Key Terms
autocracy, monarchy, oligarchy, democracy, 
republic, political party, free enterprise
Find Out
■ What are the main characteristics of a 

democracy?

■ Why is free enterprise conducive to the growth

and preservation of democracy?

Understanding Concepts
Cultural Pluralism How does a representative
democracy provide a good government for diverse
peoples?

BEIJING, CHINA, JUNE 1989

early 

Democracy Assaulted
Some  10,000  Chinese

troops  surprised  sleep-
ing  protesters  in  Tianan-
this
men  Square 
morning. The  brutal  as-
sault, one of the worst days
of bloodshed  in  Commu-
nist  China’s  history, came
after seven weeks of demon-
strations by students calling
for  democracy. The  pro-
testers scattered in terror as
Democracy”
soldiers  sprayed  them  with
fire.
automatic  weapons 
the 
Once  government  forces  gained  control  of
100-acre square, they used a tank to crush the Goddess
of Democracy, a 33-foot plaster and styrofoam statue
that  students  had  erected. The  Chinese  Red  Cross
put the death toll at almost 2,600.

The “Goddess of

18 CHAPTER 1: PEOPLE AND GOVERNMENT

The United States has established a repre-

sentative  democracy  that  serves  as  a
model for government and inspires peo-
ple around the world. Students in China
in 1989 marched for “government of the people, by
the people, and for the people.” Today democracies
outnumber all other forms of government.

Over  the  centuries, people  have  organized
their  governments  in  many  different  ways. In
Saudi Arabia, for example, the ruling royal family
controls the government and its resources. Family
members choose the king from among themselves.
Thousands  of miles  away, in  Burkina  Faso  in
Africa, a small group of wealthy landowners and
military officers governs that country. In Sweden
the people elect the Riksdag, the national legisla-
ture, which in turn selects the prime minister to
carry out the laws.

Major Types of Government

Governments  can  be  classified  in  many
ways. The  most  time-honored  system
comes  from  the  ideas  of the  ancient  Greek
philosopher Aristotle. It is based on a key ques-
tion: Who governs the state? Under this system of
classification, all governments belong to one of
three major groups: (1) autocracy—rule by one
person; (2) oligarchy—rule by a few persons; or
(3) democracy—rule by many persons.
Autocracy Any  system  of government  in
which the power and authority to rule are in the
hands of a single individual is an autocracy.
This is the oldest and one of the most common
forms of government. Historically, most auto-
crats have maintained their positions of au-
thority  by  inheritance  or  the  ruthless  use 
of military  or  police  power. Several  forms 
of autocracy exist. One is an absolute or total-
itarian dictatorship. In a totalitarian dicta-
torship, the ideas  of a  single  leader  are
glorified. The government seeks to control all 

French Dictator

aspects of social and economic life. Ex-
amples of totalitarian dictatorship in-
clude Adolf Hitler’s government in Nazi
Germany (from 1933 to 1945), Benito
Mussolini’s rule in Italy (from 1922 to
1943), and Joseph Stalin’s regime in the
Soviet Union (from 1924 to 1953). In
such dictatorships, government is not
responsible to the people, and the peo-
ple lack the power to limit their rulers.
Monarchy is another form of auto-
cratic  government. In  a  monarchy  a
king, queen, or emperor exercises the
supreme powers of government. Mon-
archs  usually  inherit  their  positions.
Absolute monarchs have complete and
unlimited power to rule their people.
The king of Saudi Arabia, for example,
is such an absolute monarch. Absolute
monarchs are rare today, but from the
1400s  to  the  1700s, kings  or  queens
with  absolute  powers  ruled  most  of
Western Europe.

Today  some  countries, such  as
Great Britain, Sweden, Japan, and the
Netherlands, have constitutional mon-
archs. These monarchs share govern-
mental powers with elected legislatures
or serve mainly as the ceremonial lead-
ers of their governments.
Oligarchy An oligarchy is any system
of government in which a small group holds power.
The group derives its power from wealth, military
power, social position, or a combination of these ele-
ments. Sometimes religion is the source of power.
Today the governments of Communist countries,
such as China, are mostly oligarchies. In such coun-
tries, leaders in the Communist Party and the armed
forces control the government.

Both dictatorships and oligarchies sometimes
claim they rule for the people. Such governments
may try to give the appearance of control by the
people. For example, they might hold elections,
but offer only one candidate, or control the elec-
tion results in other ways. Such governments may
also have some type of legislature or national as-
sembly  elected  by  or  representing  the  people.
These legislatures, however, approve only policies
and decisions already made by the leaders. As in a

Absolute Power Artist Jacques-Louis David depicts
absolute ruler and military leader Napoleon Bonaparte in
Napoleon Crossing the Great St. Bernard in the late 1790s.
Why do you think dictators control their national 
armies and police forces?

dictatorship, oligarchies usually suppress all politi-
cal opposition—sometimes ruthlessly.
Democracy A democracy is any system of gov-
ernment in which rule is by the people. The term
democracy comes from the Greek demos (meaning
“the people”) and kratia (meaning “rule”). The an-
cient Greeks used the word democracy to mean
government by the many in contrast to govern-
ment by the few. Pericles, a great leader of ancient
Athens, declared, “Our constitution is named a
democracy because it is in the hands not of the few,
but of the many.”

The key idea of democracy is that the people
hold sovereign power. Abraham Lincoln captured
this spirit best when he described democracy as
“government of the people, by the people, and for
the people.”

CHAPTER 1: PEOPLE AND GOVERNMENT 19

COMPARING Governments
COMPARING Governments

    GOVERNMENT 

POWER

   TYPE OF

GOVERNMENT

Unitary

Federal

Democracy

Dictatorship

Oligarchy

Government
Systems
Country 

Chile

China

Cuba

India

Japan

South 
Africa

Syria

United 
States

practiced in cities, states, provinces,
and countries where the population
is too large to meet regularly in one
place. It is the most efficient way to
ensure that the rights of individual
citizens, who  are  part  of a  large
group, are represented.

In  a  republic, voters  are  the
source of the government’s authority.
Elected  representatives  who  are  re-
sponsible to the people exercise that
power. As  Benjamin  Franklin  was
leaving the Constitutional Conven-
tion in Philadelphia in 1787, a woman
approached  him  and  asked, “What
kind of government have you given
us, Dr. Franklin?  A  republic  or  a
monarchy?” Franklin answered,“A re-
public, Madam, if you can keep it.”
Franklin’s response indicated that the
Founders preferred a republic over a
monarchy but that a republic requires
citizen participation.

For most Americans today, the
terms representative democracy, re-
public, and  constitutional  republic
mean  the  same  thing: a  system 
of limited  government  where  the
people  are  the  ultimate  source  of
governmental authority. It should be
understood, however, that through-
out the world not every democracy
is  a  republic. Great  Britain, for 
example, is a democracy but not a
republic because it has a constitutional monarch as
its head of state.

Characteristics of Democracy
Today some nations of the world misuse the
word democracy. Many countries call their
governments “democratic” or “republican” whether
they really are or not. The government of North
Korea, for example, is an oligarchy, because a small
number of Communist Party leaders run the gov-
ernment. Yet their country is called the Democrat-
ic People’s Republic of Korea. A true democratic
government, as opposed to one that only uses the
term democratic in its name, has characteristics that
distinguish it from other forms of government.

Source: Clement, Clement’s Encyclopedia of World Governments 
(Dallas: Political Research Inc., 1996).

Critical Thinking
                         The United States is one of many
countries with a democratic type of government. What is 
the difference between a democracy and an oligarchy?

Democracy may take one of two forms. In a
direct democracy, the people govern themselves
by voting on issues individually as citizens. Direct
democracy exists only in very small societies where
citizens can actually meet regularly to discuss and
decide key issues and problems. Direct democracy
is still found in some New England town meetings
and in some of the smaller states, called cantons, of
Switzerland. No country today, however, has a gov-
ernment based on direct democracy.

In an indirect or representative democracy,
the people elect representatives and give them the
responsibility and power to make laws and conduct
government. An assembly of the people’s represen-
tatives may be called a council, a legislature, a con-
gress, or a parliament. Representative democracy is

20 CHAPTER 1: PEOPLE AND GOVERNMENT

Individual Liberty No individual, of course,
can be completely free to do absolutely anything he
or she wants. That would result in chaos. Rather,
democracy requires that all people be as free as
possible to develop their own capacities. Govern-
ment in a democracy works to promote the kind of
equality in which all people have an equal oppor-
tunity to develop their talents to the fullest extent
possible.
Majority  Rule  with  Minority  Rights
Democracy also requires that government deci-
sions be based on majority rule. In a democracy
people usually accept decisions made by the ma-
jority of voters in a free election. Representative
democracy means that laws enacted in the legisla-
tures represent the will of the majority of lawmak-
ers. Because these lawmakers are elected by the
people, the laws are accepted by the people.

At  the  same  time, the  American  concept
of democracy includes a concern about the possible
tyranny of the majority. The Constitution helps
ensure that the rights of individuals in the minority
will be protected.

Respect for minority rights can be difficult to
maintain, especially  when  society  is  under  great

stress. For example, during World War II, the gov-
ernment imprisoned more than 100,000 Japanese
Americans in relocation camps because it feared
they  would  be  disloyal. The  relocation  program
caused severe hardships for many Japanese Ameri-
cans and deprived them of their basic liberties. Even
so, the program was upheld by the Supreme Court
in 1944 in Korematsu v. United States 1 and in one
other similar case.

Endov. United States In the same year as the
Korematsu case, the Supreme Court did uphold 
the rights of Mitsuye Endo. A native-born citizen,
Endo was fired from a California state job in 1942
and sent to a relocation center. Her lawyer chal-
lenged  the  War  Relocation  Authority’s  right  to
detain a loyal American citizen. The case finally
reached the Supreme Court in 1944.

On the day after the exclusionary order was 
revoked by the military commander, the Court

See the following footnoted materials in the Reference Handbook:
1. Korematsu v. United States case summary, 

page 760. 

Relocation and Discrimination

Civil Liberties More
than 70,000 of the people
of Japanese descent in-
terned during World War II
were Nisei, or American-
born. What kind of rec-
ompense did internment
victims receive in the
1980s?

CHAPTER 1: PEOPLE AND GOVERNMENT 21

Free Elections As we have seen, democratic
governments receive their legitimacy by the con-
sent of the governed. The authority to create and
run the government rests with the people. All gen-
uine democracies have free and open elections.
Free elections give people the chance to choose
their leaders and to voice their opinions on various
issues. Free elections also help ensure that public
officials pay attention to the wishes of the people.
In a democracy several characteristics mark
free  elections. First, everyone’s  vote  carries  the
same weight—a principle often expressed in the
phrase “one person, one vote.” Second, all candi-
dates have the right to express their views freely,
giving voters access to competing ideas. Third, cit-
izens are free to help candidates or support issues.
Fourth, the  legal  requirements  for  voting, such 
as  age, residence, and  citizenship, are  kept  to  a
minimum. Thus, racial, ethnic, religious, or other
discriminatory tests cannot be used to restrict vot-
ing. Fifth, citizens may vote freely by secret ballot,
without coercion or fear of punishment for their
voting decisions.

ruled that Mitsuye Endo could no longer be held in
custody. Justice Frank Murphy wrote:

“Detention in Relocation Centers of people

of Japanese ancestry regardless of loyalty is
not only unauthorized by Congress or the
Executive, but is another example of the
unconstitutional resort to racism inherent
in the entire evacuation program. . . .
Racial discrimination of this nature bears
no reasonable relation to military necessity
and is utterly foreign to the ideals and tra-

ditions of American people.”

—Justice Frank Murphy, 1944

In recent years the wartime relocation pro-
gram has been criticized as a denial of individual
rights and as proof that tyranny can occur in even
the most democratic societies. In 1988 Congress
acknowledged the “grave injustice” of the reloca-
tion experience and offered payments of $20,000
to those Japanese Americans still living who had
been relocated.

articipating
articipating
I N   G O V E R N M E N T
I N   G O V E R N M E N T

Analyzing survey results

22 CHAPTER 1: PEOPLE AND GOVERNMENT

Determining the
Social Consensus

Democracy depends, in part, on

a social consensus. Certain
ideas, values, and beliefs that
are shared by a great majority of peo-
ple help to support and stabilize 

2. Burning the American flag as 

a symbol of protest should 
be made unconstitutional.

3. Freedom of speech includes 
the right to lie on your income 
tax form.

4. Wealthy people should pay a

higher percentage of taxes than
low-income people. 

5. Anyone who dumps trash on

public property should be fined.
6. Scientists should not be permit-

ted to use animals for experi-
ments.
Activity

Compile the results of your 

survey. Analyze the data and create
a poster that illustrates the social
consensus of your survey group. 
Be sure your poster includes charts
and graphs that display the survey
results.

democratic govern-
ments. What are the
key elements in the
social consensus of
your community? 

Survey a variety

of people asking
whether they agree
or disagree with the
following: 
1. Everyone should 
be given an oppor-
tunity for a free 
public education.

Prerequisites of Democracy: An Educated Public

▲

Past As the nation grew,
standards and methods
of education also expand-
ed. A teacher at a school
in Nebraska teaches a
multiplication lesson in
1895.

Present Today students
use computer technology
to develop skills needed
in modern society.

▲

Civic 
Participation
Why would demo-
cracy more likely
thrive in a country
with an educated
public? 

Competing Political Parties Political par-
ties are an important element of democratic gov-
ernment. A political party is a group of individuals
with  broad  common  interests  who  organize  to
nominate candidates for office, win elections, con-
duct government, and determine public policy. In
the United States, while any number of political
parties may compete, a two-party system in which
the Republicans and the Democrats have become
the major political parties has developed.

Rival parties help make elections meaningful.
They give voters a choice among candidates. They
also help simplify and focus attention on key issues
for voters. Finally, in democratic countries, the po-
litical party or parties that are out of power serve
as a “loyal opposition.” That is, by criticizing the
policies and actions of the party in power, they can
help make those in power more responsible to the
people.

The Soil of Democracy

Historically, few  nations  have  practiced
democracy. One  reason  may  be  that  real
democracy  seems  to  require  a  special  environ-
ment. Democratic government is more likely to

succeed in countries which to some degree meet
five general criteria that reflect the quality of life of
citizens.
Active Citizen Participation Democracy
requires citizens who are willing to participate in
civic life. Countries in which citizens are able to in-
form themselves about issues, to vote in elections,
to serve on juries, to work for candidates, and to
run for government office are more likely to main-
tain a strong democracy than countries where cit-
izens do not participate fully in their government.
A Favorable Economy Democracy succeeds
more in countries that do not have extremes of
wealth and poverty and that have a large middle
class. The opportunity to control one’s economic
decisions provides a base for making independent
political decisions. In the United States this con-
cept is called free enterprise. If people do not have
control of their economic lives, they will not likely
be free to make political decisions.

Countries  with  stable, growing  economies
seem better able to support democratic govern-
ment. In the past, autocrats who promised citi-
zens jobs and food have toppled many democratic

CHAPTER 1: PEOPLE AND GOVERNMENT 23

governments during times of severe economic de-
pression. People who are out of work or unable to
feed their families often become more concerned
about security than about voting or exercising
other political rights.
Widespread Education Democracy is more
likely to succeed in countries with an educated
public. The debate over public education in Amer-
ica was settled in the 1830s. For example, in 1835
Pennsylvania voted to fund public schools. Thad-
deus Stevens, speaking to the Pennsylvania state
legislature in favor of the funding legislation, said:

“If an elective republic is to endure for any

great length of time, every elector must
have sufficient information . . . to direct
wisely the legislature, the ambassadors,
and the executive of the nation. . . . [I]t is
the duty of government to see that the
means of information be diffused to every

citizen.”—Thaddeus Stevens, April 1835

Strong Civil Society Democracy is not possi-
ble without a civil society, a complex network of
voluntary associations, economic groups, religious
organizations, and many other kinds of groups
that exist independently of government. The Unit-
ed States has thousands of such organizations—
the  Red  Cross, the  Humane  Society, the  Sierra

Club, the National Rifle Association, your local
church and newspaper, labor unions, and business
groups. These organizations give citizens a way to
make their views known to government officials
and the general public. They also give citizens a
means to take responsibility for protecting their
rights, and they give everyone a chance to learn
about democracy by participating in it.
A Social Consensus Democracy also pros-
pers where most people accept democratic values
such as individual liberty and equality for all. Such
countries  are  said  to  have  a  social  consensus.
There also must be general agreement about the
purpose and limits of government.

History shows that conditions in the American
colonies favored the growth of democracy. Many
individuals had an opportunity to get ahead eco-
nomically. The American colonists were among
the most educated people of the world at the time.
Thomas Jefferson remarked that Americans

and taken up the republican government
with as much ease as  . . . [they] would
throwing off an old and putting on a new

“. . . seem to have deposited the monarchial
suit of clothes.”—Thomas Jefferson, 1776 

The English heritage provided a consensus of
political and social values. In time, the benefits of
democracy would extend to all Americans.

Section  3 Assessment
Section  3 Assessment

Checking for Understanding
1. Main Idea In a graphic organizer similar to the
one below, show who rules the state in each of
Aristotle’s three classifications of government.

Classification

Ruler(s)

Critical Thinking
5. Distinguishing Fact from Opinion Suppose you

are assigned to interview the president of the
Republic of Mauritania. What questions would
help you determine if democracy exists there?

2. Define autocracy, monarchy, oligarchy, democra-

cy, republic, political party, free enterprise.

3. Identify “one person, one vote.”
4. What characteristics of democracy distinguish it

from other forms of government?

24 CHAPTER 1: PEOPLE AND GOVERNMENT

Cultural Pluralism How well are the will of 
the majority and the rights of minorities being
preserved in the United States? Ask several
people their opinions. Come to class prepared
to share your findings.

CASES TO DEBATE

Ward v. Rock Against
Racism, 1989
The Constitution 
limits the power of
government to restrict
free speech. At the same time, a legitimate purpose of government is
to maintain public order, including protecting citizens from unwel-
come and excessive noise. Does the First Amendment allow a city to
regulate the sound level at rock concerts held in a public park? The
case of Ward v. Rock Against Racism addressed this question.

Students enjoying a
Central Park concert

Background of the Case

Rock concerts are regularly held in New York

City’s Central Park. Area residents had complained
of too much noise at some events. At other events
audiences said the sound was not loud enough. In
1986 the city passed a regulation requiring groups
performing in the park to use a sound system pro-
vided and operated by the city. 

Rock Against Racism, an anti-racist rock group,
had sponsored annual concerts in Central Park and
had always provided their own sound equipment
and sound technician. Rock Against Racism
charged that the city regulation violated their rights
to free speech under the First Amendment. The
group won a lower federal court case. The Supreme
Court agreed to hear the case in 1989.

The Constitutional Issue

Music has long been considered a form of pro-

tected speech under the First Amendment. However,

the courts do allow governments to make regula-
tions that may incidentally limit speech in an effort
to accomplish a legitimate purpose of government.
Thus, in several cases the Supreme Court had said
that the governments can limit the time, place, and
manner of speech if the aim is not to censor the
content of the speech but to help further such inter-
ests as health and safety. To be constitutional, how-
ever, such regulations must not be directed at the
content of the speech. 

Rock Against Racism argued that the regula-
tion violated the First Amendment by giving city 
officials artistic control over performers in the park.
The group claimed the regulation was not narrowly
focused and gave city officials the chance to select
poor equipment or to modify the sound if they 
did not like the message. The city responded that 
it had a legitimate purpose in protecting citizens
from excessive noise and that its guidelines were
focused on controlling noise levels in a way that
was fair to the audience, the performers, and 
citizens living nearby. 

Debating the Case
Debating the Case

Questions to Consider
1. Was the regulation a proper exercise of the 

government’s power to maintain order, or 
was it a violation of the First Amendment? 

2. If officials did not like the message in the

music, could they use the regulation to control
the content? 

You Be the Judge

The courts have established that governments

may enforce regulations that incidentally limit
speech if the regulation serves a legitimate govern-
ment interest. What was the city’s goal in drawing
up the regulation? Was there another, less intrusive
way the city could have handled this issue?

25

S e c t i on   4
S e c t i on   4

Economic Theories

Reader’s Guide

Key Terms
economics, capitalism, free market, laissez-faire,
socialism, bourgeoisie, proletariat, communism,
command economy 
Find Out
■ In what three ways has the United States 

modified its free enterprise system?

■ According to Karl Marx, what was the ultimate

goal of true communism?

Understanding Concepts
Free Enterprise What features of the American
economy provide incentive for people to achieve
economic goals?

Teen Entrepreneurs
RICHLAND, WASHINGTON, AUGUST 17, 2000  

The bopLOP.com logo

Instead  of

yard
work  this  sum-
mer, Mark  Michael,
Ryan Robinson, and
Charlie  Cannon  de-
cided  to  make  big
money. They started their own dot-com travel compa-
ny and plan to earn $3 million in the next year.
Michael has been clipping Wall Street Journal sto-
ries about young entrepreneurs since the ninth grade.
“I’ve  read  them  a  million  times,” he  says. Cannon
searched the Web for travel-related sites. Robinson de-
signed the Web pages, and Michael called companies
launched
to  sell  on-site  ads. On  July  1  they 
bopLOP.com  with  over  2,100  links  to  travel-related
Web  sites. “We  are  the  only  (search  engine)  that  has 
actually 100 percent travel,” Cannon says.

26 CHAPTER 1: PEOPLE AND GOVERNMENT

Selling  advertising, providing  a  service  or

product to meet a demand, paying wages
and taxes—these are economic activities.
Economics can be defined as the study of
human efforts to satisfy seemingly unlimited wants
through the use of limited resources. Resources in-
clude natural materials such as land, water, miner-
als, and trees. Resources also include such human
factors as skills, knowledge, and physical capabili-
ties. There are never enough resources to produce
all the goods and services people could possibly
want. Therefore, people in every nation must de-
cide how these resources are to be used. Govern-
ments generally regulate this economic activity.

The Role of Economic Systems
Governments around the world provide for
many kinds of economic systems. All eco-
nomic systems, however, must make three major
economic  decisions: (1)  what  and  how  much
should be produced; (2) how goods and services
should be produced; and (3) who gets the goods
and services that are produced. Each major type
of economic system in the world—capitalism, so-
cialism, and communism—answers these ques-
tions differently.

Capitalism

At one end of the spectrum is an econom-
ic system in which freedom of choice and
individual incentive for workers, investors, con-
sumers, and business enterprises is emphasized.
The government assumes that society will be
best served by any productive economic activity
that free individuals choose. This system is usu-
ally referred to as free enterprise, or capitalism.
Pure capitalism has five main characteristics:
(1) private ownership and control of property
and economic resources; (2) free enterprise; (3)
competition among businesses; (4) freedom of
choice; and (5) the possibility of profits.

Tools of Capitalism

Free Enterprise Teens
possess increased buying
power and are a target 
audience for businesses.
How does the free en-
terprise system con-
tribute to the idea of
individual rights and
freedoms? 

Adam Smith

Origins of Capitalism No one person invent-
ed the idea of capitalism. It developed gradually
from the economic and political changes in me-
dieval and early modern Europe over hundreds of
years. Two important concepts laid the foundation
for the market system that is at the heart of capi-
talism. First is the idea that people could work for
economic  gain. Second  is  the  idea  that  wealth
should be used aggressively.

Major changes in the economic organization
of Europe began with the opening of trade routes
to the East in the thirteenth century. As trade in-
creased, people began to invest money to make
profits. By the eighteenth century, Europe had na-
tional states, a wealthy middle class familiar with
money and markets, and a new attitude toward
work and wealth. Included in this new attitude
were the ideas of progress, invention, and the free
market. The free market meant that buyers and
sellers were free to make unlimited economic deci-
sions in the marketplace.

In 1776 Adam Smith, a Scottish philosopher
and economist, provided a philosophy for this new
system. Smith described capitalism in his book The
Wealth of Nations.1 From the writings of Smith

and others came the basic idea of laissez-faire eco-
nomics. Laissez-faire, a French term, means “to let
alone.” According to this philosophy, government
should keep its hands off the economy. In laissez-
faire economics, the government’s role is strictly
limited to those few actions needed to ensure free
competition in the marketplace.

In theory, what does a free-enterprise econo-
my  mean?  In  a  free-enterprise  or  pure  market
economy, economic decisions are made by buyers
(consumers) and sellers (producers). Sellers own
businesses that produce goods or services. Buyers
pay for those goods and services that they believe
best fit their needs. Thus, the answer to the ques-
tion of what to produce is determined in the mar-
ketplace by the actions of buyers and sellers, rather
than by the government.

Competition plays a key role in a free-enter-
prise economy. Sellers compete with one another
to  produce  goods  and  services  at  reasonable
prices. Sellers also compete for resources. At the
same time, consumers compete with one another
to buy what they want and need. These same con-
sumers in their roles as workers try to sell their
skills and labor for the best wages or salaries they
can get.

See the following footnoted materials in the Reference Handbook:
1. The Wealth of Nations, page 807. 

CHAPTER 1: PEOPLE AND GOVERNMENT 27

Free Enterprise in the United States No
nation in the world has a pure capitalist system.
The United States, however, is a leading example of
a capitalist system in which the government plays a
role. For the most part, the government’s main
economic task has been to preserve the free mar-
ket. The national government has always regulated
American foreign trade, and it has always owned
some property. Nevertheless, the government has
tried to encourage business competition and pri-
vate property ownership.
Governmental  Influence Since  the  early
1900s, however, the national government’s influ-
ence on the economy of the United States has in-
creased  in  several  ways. First, as  the  nation’s
government has grown, it has become the single
largest buyer of goods and services in the country.
Second, since the early 1900s, the United States
government has increasingly regulated the econo-
my for various purposes. The Meat Inspection Act
and Pure Food and Drug Act were early attempts
by  government  to  protect  the  consumer. Since
then, many laws have been passed giving the gov-
ernment a role in such areas as labor-management
relations, the regulation of environmental pollu-
tion, and control over many banking and invest-
ment practices.

Third, the Great Depression of the 1930s left
millions of Americans without jobs. The national
government set up the Social Security system, pro-
grams to aid the unemployed, and a variety of social
programs. In addition, the government began to set
up public corporations like the Tennessee Valley Au-
thority that competed directly with private compa-
nies to provide services such as electricity.
Mixed-Market Economy Today the Ameri-
can economy and others like it are described by
economists  as  mixed-market  economies. A
mixed-market economy is an economy in which
free enterprise is combined with and supported by
government decisions in the marketplace. Govern-
ment keeps competition free and fair and protects
the public interest.

Even though it is a mixed-market economy,
the American economic system is rooted deeply in
the idea of individual initiative—that each person
knows what is best for himself or herself. Further,
it respects the right of all persons to own private

28 CHAPTER 1: PEOPLE AND GOVERNMENT

property. Finally, it  recognizes  that  freedom  to
make economic choices is a part of the freedom of
political choice.

Socialism

Under  the  second  type  of economic  sys-
tem—socialism—the government owns the
basic means of production, determines the use of re-
sources, distributes the products and wages, and
provides social services such as education, health
care, and welfare. Socialism has three main goals: (1)
the distribution of wealth and economic opportuni-
ty  equally  among  people; (2)  society’s  control,
through its government, of all major decisions about
production; and (3) public ownership of most land,
of factories, and of other means of production.

The basic ideas behind modern socialism began
to develop in the nineteenth century. Industrializa-
tion in Europe caused several problems. A class of
low-paid workers lived in terrible poverty, slums
grew in cities, and working conditions were miser-
able. In reaction to these problems, some socialists
rejected capitalism and favored violent revolution.
Others  planned  and  built  socialist  communities
where laborers were supposed to share equally in
the benefits of industrial production.
Democratic Socialism The socialists who
believed in peaceful changes wanted to work with-
in the democratic political system to improve eco-
nomic  conditions, under  a  system  called
democratic socialism. Under this system the peo-
ple have basic human rights and have some control
over government officials through free elections
and multiparty systems. However, the government
owns the basic means of production and makes
most economic decisions.

Tanzania, Denmark, Norway, and Sweden today
operate under a form of democratic socialism. The
government controls steel mills, shipyards, railroads,
and airlines. It also provides services such as health
and medical care.

Opponents of socialism say that it stifles indi-
vidual initiative. They also claim that socialist na-
tions’ high  tax  rates  hinder  economic  growth.
Further, some people argue that, because socialism
requires  increased  governmental  regulation, it
helps create big government and thus may lead to
dictatorship.

Communism

Karl Marx (1818–1883), a German thinker
and writer, was a socialist who advocated vi-
olent revolution. After studying the conditions of
his time, he concluded that the capitalist system
would collapse. He first published his ideas in 1848
in a pamphlet called The Communist Manifesto. He
later expanded his ideas in his book called Das
Kapital (1867). Marx believed that in industrial-
ized nations the population is divided into capital-
ists, or the bourgeoisie who own the means of
production, and workers, or the proletariat, who
work to produce the goods. Capitalists are a ruling
class because they use their economic power to
force their will on the workers. The workers, Marx
argued, do not receive full compensation for their
labor because the owners keep the profits from the
goods the workers make. Marx believed that wages
in a capitalist system would never rise above a sub-
sistence level—just enough for workers to survive.

Class Struggles Marx interpreted all human
history as a class struggle between the workers and
the owners of the means of production. Friedrich
Engels, a close associate of Marx, wrote:

“Former society, moving in class antago-

nisms, had need of a state, that is, an orga-
nization of the exploiting class at each
period for the maintenance of external
conditions of production: . . . for the
forcible holding down of the exploited class

in the conditions of oppression.”—Friedrich Engels

Marx predicted that, as time passed, a smaller
and smaller group of capitalists would control all
means of production and, hence, all wealth. Even-
tually the workers would rise in violent revolution
and overthrow the capitalists. The goal of this rev-
olution was government ownership of the means
of production and distribution.

Glorification of the Proletariat

Comparative Government This painting, The Cultivation of Cotton by Aleksandr Volkov, is
a propaganda piece exalting workers and the virtues of hard work. Analyze the message
this painting is supposed to send to citizens laboring under a Communist government.

CHAPTER 1: PEOPLE AND GOVERNMENT 29

Karl Marx first called his own ideas “scientific
socialism.” He  believed  that  in  time, socialism
would develop into full communism. Under com-
munism one class would evolve, property would
all be held in common, and there would be no
need for government.

In The Communist Manifesto, Karl

Marx not only wrote that economic
events would finally lead to com-
munism by means of revolution,
but in fact encouraged it:

“In short, Communists

everywhere support
every revolutionary
movement against the
existing social and politi-
cal order of things. . . . Let
the ruling class tremble at
the Communist revolution.
The proletarians have nothing
to lose but their chains. Working

men of all countries, unite! ”

—Karl Marx, 1848

Karl Marx

Communism as a Command Economy
In  Communist  nations, government  planners 
decide how much to produce, what to produce,
and how to distribute the goods and services pro-
duced. This system is called a command economy
because decisions are made at the upper levels of
government and handed down to managers. In

Checking for Understanding
1. Main Idea In a 

graphic organizer 
similar to the one 
at the right, identify 
three functions of 
economic systems. 

2. Define economics, capitalism, free market, 

laissez-faire, socialism, bourgeoisie, proletariat,
communism, command economy. 

3. Identify Adam Smith, Karl Marx.
4. What did Marx believe would happen in a true

communist economy?

30 CHAPTER 1: PEOPLE AND GOVERNMENT

Communist countries this means that the state
owns the land, natural resources, industry, banks,
and transportation facilities. The state also con-
trols mass communication including newspapers,
magazines, television, radio, and motion picture

production.

Many nations have developed
their own styles of communism. The
economy is a full-time responsibili-
ty  of the  People’s  Republic  of
China, for example. Government
planners  adopted  a  five-year
plan that agreed with the goals
of the  Communist  Party. The
plan specified, for example, how
many new housing units would
be produced over the next five
years. It also dictated where this
housing  would  be  built, what
kinds of materials would be used,
who would be eligible to live in the
new housing, and how much rent they
would  pay. Such  planning  removed
economic  freedom  from  individual
builders, but  also  political  freedom  from  con-
sumers who were told where to live.

Because Communist countries sometimes fail
to  provide  adequate  standards  of living, these 
governments have had to choose between change
and  revolt  by  the  people. China  has  begun  to
loosen its controls and decentralize some business
decisions.

Section  4 Assessment
Section  4 Assessment

Section  4  Rev iew
Section  4  Rev iew

Critical Thinking
5. Making Inferences What ideas presented by

Karl Marx appealed to people in nations where
wealth was unevenly distributed?

Economic
Systems

Free Enterprise Competition is an important
factor in the United States economy. Find 
advertisements in newspapers that illustrate
various kinds of competition. Display these
ads on a bulletin board. Should the govern-
ment regulate prices? Why or why not?

Identifying Central Issues

Aristotle (384–322 B.C.)

Identifying central issues is finding the

key themes, or major ideas, in a body
of information. Central issues are the

framework that holds a body of infor-
mation together.

Learning the Skill

To identify a central issue:

1. Find out the setting and purpose

of the selection.

2. Skim the material to identify its

general subject.

3. Read the information to pinpoint 
the ideas that the details support.

4. Identify the central issue. Ask: What part of

the material conveys the main idea? 

Read the following excerpt from a speech 

by Pericles honoring the soldiers of Athens.

“Our constitution is called a democracy 

because power is in the hands not of a 
minority but of the whole people. When it
is a question of settling private disputes,
everyone is equal before the law, when it is
a question of putting one person before an-
other in positions of public responsibility,
what counts is not membership of a par-
ticular class, but the actual ability which
the man possesses. . . . And, just as our po-
litical life is free and open, so is our day-to-

day life in our relations with each other.”

—Thucydides, from The History of
the Peloponnesian Wars, 400s B.C.

Pericles emphasizes equality before the law,

ability as the basis of public service, and free-
dom. The central issue: Athens is a democracy.

Practicing the Skill 

Aristotle, a philosopher from

Athens, wrote about government in
Politics. Read the excerpt from Politics
below and answer the questions that
follow.

“The basis of a democratic state is

liberty; which, according to the com-
mon opinion of men, can only be
enjoyed in such a state:—this they
affirm to be the great end of every
democracy. One principle of liberty

is for all to rule and be ruled in turn . . .
whence it follows that the majority must be
supreme, and that whatever the majority ap-
prove must be the end and the just. Every cit-
izen, it is said, must have equality, and
therefore in a democracy the poor have more
power than the rich, because there are more

of them.”

—Aristotle

1. According to Aristotle, which group holds the

most power in a democracy?

2. Summarize the central issue in one sentence.

Application Activity
Application Activity

Bring to class a news article that deals

with some governmental issue. Identify the
central issue and explain why it is important.

The Glencoe Skillbuilder
Interactive Workbook, Level 2
provides instruction and practice
in key social studies skills.

31

Chapter  1
Chapter  1

Assessment and Activities

GOVERNMENT

Self-Check Quiz Visit the United States Government:
Democracy in Action Web site at gov.glencoe.com and
click on Chapter 1–Self-Check Quizzes to prepare for
the chapter test.

Reviewing Key Terms
Insert the terms below into the following paragraph
to describe the nature of government and differing
political and economic systems. Each term should
be used only once.

constitution, sovereignty, democracy, 
communism, autocracy, capitalism, 
state, free market, republic, 
command economy

Every (1) has a form of government that has (2)
within its territorial boundaries. A (3) is a govern-
ment of and by the people that may have a (4) that

protects the rights of the people—unlike an (5)
that concentrates power in the hands of one per-
son. The United States is a (6) with elected repre-
sentation. It has a mixed economy based on (7).
The (8) allows buyers and sellers to make econom-
ic decisions about what to produce, how much 
to produce, and who gets the goods and services
produced. In contrast, under (9), the People’s Re-
public of China and other states have operated a
(10) with government planning.

Recalling Facts
1. Why did the thirteen British colonies in 

America become known as “states”?

2. What system of government divides power
among different levels rather than giving all
power to a central government?

3. Describe three kinds of nonstate groups that

influence national politics.

4. How is a direct democracy different from a

representative democracy?

5. What is the role of government in a laissez-

faire economic system?

Purposes of Government

Government Systems

• Maintain social order
• Provide public services
• Provide national security
• Make economic decisions

• Unitary System—National or central government holds all

key powers

• Federal System—Power is divided between the national

government and state or provincial governments

Characteristics of Democracy

Economic Theories

• Individual liberty
• Majority rule with minority rights
• Free elections
• Competing political parties

• Capitalism—Emphasis on freedom of choice and 

individual incentive

• Socialism—Government owns means of production,
decides how to use resources, and distributes wealth 
equally among people

• Communism—No social classes; all property is held in

common; government is unnecessary

Chapter  1
Chapter  1

Interpreting Political Cartoons Activity

“Founding Fathers! How come no Founding Mothers?”

1. What is the subject of the painting in the cartoon?
2. According to the painting, who were the Founders of 

the United States?

3. What message is the cartoonist trying to communicate?
4. Do you think women influenced the creation of the

United States government? Why or why not?

Understanding
Concepts
1. Public Policy List the major

advantages of living under a
constitutional government.
2. Global Perspectives Which of

the following ideas do you
perceive to be the most
powerful force in the world
today: communism, social-
ism, or capitalism? Explain.

Critical Thinking
1. Understanding Cause and 

Effect Why is widespread 
educational opportunity nec-
essary for a nation to devel-
op a democratic system?
2. Making Comparisons  In a
Venn diagram like the one
below, show how capitalism,
democratic socialism, and
communism are alike and
different.

Capitalism

Demo-
cratic

Socialism

Communism

Analyzing Primary Sources
The Declaration of Independence is not part of 
the U.S. Constitution and is not considered a legal
document upon which the government of the United
States is based. It did, however, did put into simple
terms the reasons why the original 13 colonies
were seeking to form their own nation. Read the
excerpt and answer the questions that follow.

“We hold these truths to be self evident, that all men are
created equal, that they are endowed by their Creator
with certain unalienable Rights, that among these are
Life, Liberty, and the pursuit of Happiness. . . .
That whenever any Form of Government becomes
destructive of these ends, it is the Right of the People to
alter or abolish it, and to institute new Government . . .
as to them shall seem most likely to effect their Safety 
and Happiness.”

1. How does the Declaration of Independence

echo the ideas of John Locke? 

2. Why do you think the Founders did not include

the Declaration of Independence within the
constitutional plans for the new federal 
government?

Participating in 
Local Government
Constitutions provide a plan for
organizing and operating govern-
ments. What plan provides the
rules for your local government? Does
your local government operate under a
constitution? Contact a local government official to
find out about the basic plan of your city or town.
Where did it originate? Present your findings in a
diagram to share with the class.

CHAPTER 1: PEOPLE AND GOVERNMENT 33

