S e c t i on 2 S e c t i on 2 The Formation of Governments The government of each nation has unique Readers Guide characteristics derived from how that nation developed. These usually include a central or national government as well as the governments of smaller divisions within the country, such as provinces, states, counties, cities, towns, and villages. This does not mean that only one level of government exists. Rather, it means that the central government has the power to create state, provincial, or other local governments and may give them limited sovereignty. Great Britain, Italy, and France developed unitary governments as these nations emerged from smaller kingdoms. To begin with, the United States formed a confederacy, a loose union of independent states. He asks, What is government itself but the greatest of all reflections on human nature If men were angels, he observes, no government would be necessary. Patrick Henry 12 CHAPTER 1 PEOPLE AND GOVERNMENT Constitutions and Government A constitution is a plan that provides the rules for government. A constitution serves several major purposes. (l) It sets out ideals that the people bound by the constitution believe in and share. (2) It establishes the basic structure of government and defines the governments powers and duties. (3) It provides the supreme law for the country. Constitutions provide rules that shape the actions of government and politics, much as the rules of basketball define the action in a basketball game. The United States Constitution, drawn up in 1787, is the oldest written constitution still today. Other nations with written constitutions include France, Kenya, India, Italy, and Switzerland. In this sense the Peoples Republic of China has a constitution. The term constitutional government, however, has a special meaning. Thus, constitutional government is limited government. Despite the existence of a written constitution, the Peoples Republic of China does not have constitutional government. Incomplete Guides Constitutions themselves are important but incomplete guides to how a country is actually governed. They are incomplete for two reasons. In the United States, for example, until Franklin D. Roosevelt was elected president four times, it was custom, rather than law, that no per son should be elected president more than twice. Second, a constitution does not always reflect the actual practice of government in a country. The Peoples Republic of China, for example, has a written constitution filled with statements about the basic rights, freedoms, and duties of citizens. A Statement of Goals Most constitutions contain a statement that sets forth the goals and purposes to be served by the government. This statement is usually called the preamble. Roosevelt ran for an unprecedented third term. In federal states, such as the United States, the constitution also describes the relation ship between the national government and state governments. The French constitution has 89 articles grouped under 16 titles. The Indian constitution, the longest in the world, consists of hundreds of articles. The Highest Law Constitutions provide the supreme law for states. A constitution is usually accepted as a superior, morally binding force. It draws its authority from the people or from a special assembly chosen by the people to create the constitution. Constitutional law involves the interpretation and application of the constitution. Politics and Government The effort to control or influence the con duct and policies of government is called politics. In fact, a major political struggle developed over the ratification of the Constitution itself. People are taking part in politics when they join a citizens group protesting higher taxes or when they meet with the mayor to ask the city to repave the streets in their neighborhood. Different people make different demands on government. Construction workers may want government to support the building of new highways to create jobs. Conservationists may want the government to spend its money on mass transit and public parks instead. In a large, diverse nation like the United States, there is a continual struggle over what benefits and services government should provide, how much they should cost, and who should pay for them. Through politics, individuals and groups seek to maximize the benefits they get from government while they try to reduce the costs of these benefits. One group, for example, tries to influence government to ban smoking in public places. Other people pressure government not to restrict smoking in any way. Importance of Politics Through politics, conflicts in society are managed. As people seek re wards and benefits, politics provides a peaceful way for them to compete with one another. Special Interests The Constitution says that government should promote the general welfare. The Framers believed government should operate in the interests of all the people, not favoring any special group or person. The misuse of politics, however, should not obscure the value of a political system. Making a Difference Laura Epstein did not plan to stir her community to action when she spent the summer Making a Difference Laura Epstein of 1996 with a paint brush. She and eight other young people only wanted to paint over graffiti covered walls to help beautify downtown Seattle. CHAPTER 1 PEOPLE AND GOVERNMENT 15 Destruction and Development Southeast Asia are developing nations. Between these two levels of nations are many newly industrialized nations such as Mexico, South Korea, Singapore, Malaysia, Algeria, and Kenya. This means that people and nations must interact or depend upon one another, especially economically and politically. It also means that what hap pens in one nation or area of the world affects what happens in other places. In communications, the development of the Internet and the World Wide Web is linking billions of people and organizations across the globe. Inequalities Among Countries Nations must cooperate to solve worldwide concerns. Today the increasing demands for natural resources threaten many tropical rain forests, like this one in South America. What tensions do you think occur between developing nations and industrialized nations over the destruction of the rain forests Governing in a Complex World The United States government conducts policy in a complex world. It is not easy to define the boundaries of government. Major Inequalities Among States Because of great inequalities among countries, the world today is full of contrasts. The United States and about 20 other states, such as Japan, Canada, Australia, and France, are industrialized nations. Developing nations are only beginning to develop industrially. AlQaeda, the group that staged the September 11, 2001, terrorist strikes against the United States, is one example. AlQaeda is composed mostly of Islamic radicals drawn largely from Middle Eastern countries. It operates on a glob al scale with a large budget and holds training centers in a number of countries around the world. The Irish Republican Army (IRA) is one example of a nationalist organization. The aim of the IRA is to integrate Ireland and Northern Ireland into a single country under one Irish government. Multinational corporations are huge companies with offices and factories in many countries. International organizations, such as the World Trade Organization (WTO), are composed of many nations working together for common goals. The WTO, for example, seeks to improve economic development around the world. Richard Holder, president of Reynolds Metals Company, explained that a global company is one that operates as a worldwide, integrated system in which all operations, wherever they may be, are interdependent in terms of operations and strategies. These groups range from the United Nations (UN) to more specialized organizations such as the International Sugar Council and the Universal Postal Union.
