The pro testers scattered in terror as Democracy soldiers sprayed them with fire. The Chinese Red Cross put the death toll at almost 2,600. Students in China in 1989 marched for government of the people, by the people, and for the people. Today democracies outnumber all other forms of government. In Saudi Arabia, for example, the ruling royal family controls the government and its resources. Family members choose the king from among themselves. Major Types of Government Governments can be classified in many ways. Autocracy Any system of government in which the power and authority to rule are in the hands of a single individual is an autocracy. This is the oldest and one of the most common forms of government. Several forms of autocracy exist. The government seeks to control all French Dictator aspects of social and economic life. In a monarchy a king, queen, or emperor exercises the supreme powers of government. Absolute monarchs have complete and unlimited power to rule their people. The king of Saudi Arabia, for example, is such an absolute monarch. Absolute monarchs are rare today, but from the 1400s to the 1700s, kings or queens with absolute powers ruled most of Western Europe. Oligarchy An oligarchy is any system of government in which a small group holds power. Sometimes religion is the source of power. Today the governments of Communist countries, such as China, are mostly oligarchies. Both dictatorships and oligarchies sometimes claim they rule for the people. Such governments may try to give the appearance of control by the people. These legislatures, however, approve only policies and decisions already made by the leaders. Bernard in the late 1790s. Pericles, a great leader of ancient Athens, declared, Our constitution is named a democracy because it is in the hands not of the few, but of the many. The key idea of democracy is that the people hold sovereign power. Abraham Lincoln captured this spirit best when he described democracy as government of the people, by the people, and for the people. It is the most efficient way to ensure that the rights of individual citizens, who are part of a large group, are represented. In a republic, voters are the source of the governments authority. For most Americans today, the terms representative democracy, re public, and constitutional republic mean the same thing a system of limited government where the people are the ultimate source of governmental authority. Great Britain, for example, is a democracy but not a republic because it has a constitutional monarch as its head of state. Characteristics of Democracy Today some nations of the world misuse the word democracy. Many countries call their governments democratic or republican whether they really are or not. A true democratic government, as opposed to one that only uses the term democratic in its name, has characteristics that distinguish it from other forms of government. Source Clement, Clements Encyclopedia of World Governments (Dallas Political Research Inc., 1996). Critical Thinking The United States is one of many countries with a democratic type of government. What is the difference between a democracy and an oligarchy Democracy may take one of two forms. In a direct democracy, the people govern themselves by voting on issues individually as citizens. Direct democracy exists only in very small societies where citizens can actually meet regularly to discuss and decide key issues and problems. In an indirect or representative democracy, the people elect representatives and give them the responsibility and power to make laws and conduct government. Representative democracy is 20 CHAPTER 1 PEOPLE AND GOVERNMENT Individual Liberty No individual, of course, can be completely free to do absolutely anything he or she wants. That would result in chaos. Rather, democracy requires that all people be as free as possible to develop their own capacities. Because these lawmakers are elected by the people, the laws are accepted by the people. At the same time, the American concept of democracy includes a concern about the possible tyranny of the majority. The Constitution helps ensure that the rights of individuals in the minority will be protected. Respect for minority rights can be difficult to maintain, especially when society is under great stress. United States 1 and in one other similar case. The case finally reached the Supreme Court in 1944. On the day after the exclusionary order was revoked by the military commander, the Court See the following footnoted materials in the Reference Handbook 1. United States case summary, page 760. The authority to create and run the government rests with the people. Free elections give people the chance to choose their leaders and to voice their opinions on various issues. Free elections also help ensure that public officials pay attention to the wishes of the people. In a democracy several characteristics mark free elections. Fourth, the legal requirements for voting, such as age, residence, and citizenship, are kept to a minimum. Fifth, citizens may vote freely by secret ballot, without coercion or fear of punishment for their voting decisions. Justice Frank Murphy wrote Detention in Relocation Centers of people of Japanese ancestry regardless of loyalty is not only unauthorized by Congress or the Executive, but is another example of the unconstitutional resort to racism inherent in the entire evacuation program . Justice Frank Murphy, 1944 In recent years the wartime relocation pro gram has been criticized as a denial of individual rights and as proof that tyranny can occur in even the most democratic societies. Burning the American flag as a symbol of protest should be made unconstitutional. 3. Freedom of speech includes the right to lie on your income tax form. 4. 5. Anyone who dumps trash on public property should be fined. 6. Activity Compile the results of your survey. Analyze the data and create a poster that illustrates the social consensus of your survey group. Be sure your poster includes charts and graphs that display the survey results. What are the key elements in the social consensus of your community Survey a variety of people asking whether they agree or disagree with the following 1. Prerequisites of Democracy An Educated Public Past As the nation grew, standards and methods of education also expand ed. A teacher at a school in Nebraska teaches a multiplication lesson in 1895. Present Today students use computer technology to develop skills needed in modern society. A political party is a group of individuals with broad common interests who organize to nominate candidates for office, win elections, con duct government, and determine public policy. Rival parties help make elections meaningful. They give voters a choice among candidates. They also help simplify and focus attention on key issues for voters. That is, by criticizing the policies and actions of the party in power, they can help make those in power more responsible to the people. The Soil of Democracy Historically, few nations have practiced democracy. Democratic government is more likely to succeed in countries which to some degree meet five general criteria that reflect the quality of life of citizens. Active Citizen Participation Democracy requires citizens who are willing to participate in civic life. A Favorable Economy Democracy succeeds more in countries that do not have extremes of wealth and poverty and that have a large middle class. The opportunity to control ones economic decisions provides a base for making independent political decisions. If people do not have control of their economic lives, they will not likely be free to make political decisions. People who are out of work or unable to feed their families often become more concerned about security than about voting or exercising other political rights. Widespread Education Democracy is more likely to succeed in countries with an educated public. For example, in 1835 Pennsylvania voted to fund public schools. The Unit ed States has thousands of such organizations the Red Cross, the Humane Society, the Sierra Club, the National Rifle Association, your local church and newspaper, labor unions, and business groups. They also give citizens a means to take responsibility for protecting their rights, and they give everyone a chance to learn about democracy by participating in it. Such countries are said to have a social consensus. There also must be general agreement about the purpose and limits of government. History shows that conditions in the American colonies favored the growth of democracy. The American colonists were among the most educated people of the world at the time. In time, the benefits of democracy would extend to all Americans.
