We are the only (search engine) that has actually 100 percent travel, Cannon says. Economics can be defined as the study of human efforts to satisfy seemingly unlimited wants through the use of limited resources. The Role of Economic Systems Governments around the world provide for many kinds of economic systems. The government assumes that society will be best served by any productive economic activity that free individuals choose. This system is usu ally referred to as free enterprise, or capitalism. Pure capitalism has five main characteristics (1) private ownership and control of property and economic resources (2) free enterprise (3) competition among businesses (4) freedom of choice and (5) the possibility of profits. Tools of Capitalism Free Enterprise Teens possess increased buying power and are a target audience for businesses. First is the idea that people could work for economic gain. Second is the idea that wealth should be used aggressively. Major changes in the economic organization of Europe began with the opening of trade routes to the East in the thirteenth century. As trade in creased, people began to invest money to make profits. Included in this new attitude were the ideas of progress, invention, and the free market. In 1776 Adam Smith, a Scottish philosopher and economist, provided a philosophy for this new system. According to this philosophy, government should keep its hands off the economy. Sellers own businesses that produce goods or services. Buyers pay for those goods and services that they believe best fit their needs. Sellers compete with one another to produce goods and services at reasonable prices. Sellers also compete for resources. At the same time, consumers compete with one another to buy what they want and need. See the following footnoted materials in the Reference Handbook 1. The Wealth of Nations, page 807. CHAPTER 1 PEOPLE AND GOVERNMENT 27 Free Enterprise in the United States No nation in the world has a pure capitalist system. The United States, however, is a leading example of a capitalist system in which the government plays a role. The national government has always regulated American foreign trade, and it has always owned some property. The Meat Inspection Act and Pure Food and Drug Act were early attempts by government to protect the consumer. Third, the Great Depression of the 1930s left millions of Americans without jobs. The national government set up the Social Security system, pro grams to aid the unemployed, and a variety of social programs. Further, it respects the right of all persons to own private 28 CHAPTER 1 PEOPLE AND GOVERNMENT property. Finally, it recognizes that freedom to make economic choices is a part of the freedom of political choice. The basic ideas behind modern socialism began to develop in the nineteenth century. In reaction to these problems, some socialists rejected capitalism and favored violent revolution. Others planned and built socialist communities where laborers were supposed to share equally in the benefits of industrial production. However, the government owns the basic means of production and makes most economic decisions. Tanzania, Denmark, Norway, and Sweden today operate under a form of democratic socialism. The government controls steel mills, shipyards, railroads, and airlines. It also provides services such as health and medical care. After studying the conditions of his time, he concluded that the capitalist system would collapse. He first published his ideas in 1848 in a pamphlet called The Communist Manifesto. Capitalists are a ruling class because they use their economic power to force their will on the workers. The workers, Marx argued, do not receive full compensation for their labor because the owners keep the profits from the goods the workers make. Class Struggles Marx interpreted all human history as a class struggle between the workers and the owners of the means of production. Analyze the message this painting is supposed to send to citizens laboring under a Communist government. CHAPTER 1 PEOPLE AND GOVERNMENT 29 Karl Marx first called his own ideas scientific socialism. He believed that in time, socialism would develop into full communism. Let the ruling class tremble at the Communist revolution. The proletarians have nothing to lose but their chains. This system is called a command economy because decisions are made at the upper levels of government and handed down to managers. In Checking for Understanding 1. Main Idea In a graphic organizer similar to the one at the right, identify three functions of economic systems. 2. 3. Identify Adam Smith, Karl Marx. 4. What did Marx believe would happen in a true communist economy 30 CHAPTER 1 PEOPLE AND GOVERNMENT Communist countries this means that the state owns the land, natural resources, industry, banks, and transportation facilities. Many nations have developed their own styles of communism. The plan specified, for example, how many new housing units would be produced over the next five years. It also dictated where this housing would be built, what kinds of materials would be used, who would be eligible to live in the new housing, and how much rent they would pay. Because Communist countries sometimes fail to provide adequate standards of living, these governments have had to choose between change and revolt by the people. China has begun to loosen its controls and decentralize some business decisions.
