First offenders will be forced to lie down with neck and heels together for one night. Repeat viola tors will be whipped. A third offense will result in enslavement aboard a convict ship for a period of one year. Authorities expect the new laws to bring order and prosperity to the colony. Crumbling foundations and the ruins of the old church tower mark the site of the original Jamestown, founded in 1607. Most colonists, however, came from England. It was the English who established and governed the original thirteen colonies along the Atlantic coast. The English colonists brought ideas about government that had been developing in England for centuries. They also noticed that some of these ideas were embodied by existing governing systems in North America, such as the Iroquois League, a union of five Native American groups. The Signing of the Declaration of Independence (detail) by John Trumbull, 1824 35 Charter, that King John was forced to sign in 1215. Later generations interpreted this document as providing protection against unjust punishment and the loss of life, liberty, and property except according to law. The charter also stated that certain taxes could not be levied without popular consent. Over time, however, opponents of absolute monarchy used the precedent set by this document to gain more political liberties and support for the idea of constitutional government. In 1625 Charles I took the throne. He dissolved Parliament, lodged troops in private homes, and placed some areas under martial law. When he called Parliament back into session in 1628, the representatives forced the king to sign the Petition of Right, severely limiting the kings power. No longer could the English monarch collect taxes without Parliaments consent, imprison people without just cause, house troops in private homes without the per mission of the owner, or declare martial law unless the country was at war. English Bill of Rights In 1688 Parliament re moved James II from the throne and crowned William III and Mary II. This peaceful transfer of power was called the Glorious Revolution. William and Mary swore an oath to govern England ac cording to the statutes in Parliament agreed upon, and the laws and customs of the same. The English Bill of Rights set clear limits on what a ruler could and could not do. 2. 3. Provide suggestions for getting things done. Beginnings of Representative Government in America maintain an army. (3) The monarch cannot interfere with parliamentary elections and debates. In fact, a major cause of the American Revolution was that the colonists felt they were being deprived of these basic rights. The English Parliament was a representative assembly with the power to enact laws. It consisted of an upper chamber and a lower chamber. American legislatures grew out of the English practice of representation. John Locke, Voltaire, and Jean Jacques Rousseau believed that people should contract among themselves to form governments to protect their natural rights. Locke spelled out his political ideas in Two Treatises of Government,1 first published in 1690. His writings were widely read and discussed in both Europe and America. Colonial leaders such as Benjamin Franklin, Thomas Jefferson, and James Madison regarded these ideas as political truth. See the following footnoted materials in the Reference Handbook 1. Two Treatises of Government, page 806. Locke reasoned that in a state of nature (before governments were formed), all people were born free, equal, and independent. He believed that the laws of nature, or natural law, provided rights to life, liberty, and property. Locke, Voltaire, and Rousseau denied that people were born with an obligation to obey their rulers. Rather, in his Second Treatise of Government, Locke insisted that CHAPTER 2 ORIGINS OF AMERICAN GOVERNMENT 37 The Thirteen Colonies The Thirteen Colonies Mayflower Compact, 1620 MASSACHUSETTS Fundamental Orders of Connecticut, 1639 Declaration of Independence, 1776 U.S. The Declaration of Independence, the Constitution, and the ideas behind the French Revolution all reflected this philosophy. From these colonies the present system of American government evolved. For many years the colonists agreed. Democracy grew rapidly in all the colonies, but it did not yet exist in its current form. Women and en slaved persons could not vote, and every colony had some type of property qualification for voting. Nine of the thirteen colonies had an official or established church, and many colonists remained intolerant of religious dissent. In Puritan town meetings, for example, voting was originally reserved for members of the community church. Critical Thinking Virginia, settled in 1607, was the first English colony in America. Georgia was the last, in 1733. Chief among these practices were (1) a written constitution that guaranteed basic liberties and limited the power of government (2) a legislature of elected representatives and (3) the separation of powers between the governor (the chief executive) and the legislature. Today the United States government embodies each of these practices. Written Constitutions A key feature of the colonial period was government according to a written plan. Beginning in 1629, new Puritan immigrants settled nearby. Soon after, other English colonies began drawing up their own charters. These documents established a system of limited government and rule by law in each of the colonies. See the following footnoted materials in the Reference Handbook 1. Mayflower Compact, page 804. 2. Fundamental Orders of Connecticut, page 805. In England, the king appointed the leaders of the Church of England. Puritans rejected this idea. They believed that the members of each congregation should choose their own ministers and leaders. Many Puritans migrated to America to gain the freedom to organize their churches as they chose. By the mid1700s most colonial legislatures had been operating for more than 100 Forming a Government Political Processes Tompkins H. In the compact the Pilgrims pledged to obey the laws passed for the general good of the colony. The colonies also had to establish new towns, schools, and civil and criminal courts. Separation of Powers Colonial charters divided the power of government. Colonial legislatures had the power to pass laws, and colonial courts heard cases. Colonial legislatures became the political training grounds for the leaders who later would write the Constitution. Best Bird The bald eagle became our national bird in 1782. What did this raptor have going for it The bird is native to the United States, and to the Founders it symbolized courage, strength, freedom, and immortality. Benjamin Franklin, however, disagreed with the other Founders. He thought the bald eagle was too aggressive and preferred the turkey. As a result, representative government was an established tradition in America well before the colonists declared their independence from Great Britain in 1776. The rapidly growing colonies constantly needed new laws to cope with new circumstances.
