About 700 British troops scattered some 70 called militia members, Minute Men, who had gathered in the town of Lexington. The troops then marched on to Concord. Later, fighting broke out with another militia unit at North Concord Bridge. As the troops returned to Boston, they came under attack from more militia groups before reaching the safety of the city. Losses totaled 73 dead and 174 wounded. Rebel casualties were set at 95. Drum used at Lexington 42 CHAPTER 2 ORIGINS OF AMERICAN GOVERNMENT Until the mid1700s Great Britain had al lowed its colonies across the Atlantic to develop politically on their own. By the 1760s, however, things had begun to change dramatically as the British government felt a need to tighten its control over the colonies. The Colonies on Their Own As British subjects, the colonists in North America owed allegiance to the monarch and the British government. As with other parts of the British empire, the colonies were supposed to serve as a source of raw materials and a market for British goods. In practice, during the 150 years following the settling of Jamestown in 1607, the colonies in America did pretty much as they pleased. The colonies were more than 3,000 miles (5,556 km) from Great Britain. Orders from the monarch took two months or more to cross the Atlantic. As a result, the colonists grew accustomed to governing themselves through their representatives. Britain Tightens Control Two events drastically changed the easy relationship be tween the colonies and Britain. Second, George III, who became king in 1760, had different ideas about how the colonies should be governed. By 1756 several other European countries had become involved as well. Great Britain eventually won the war in 1763 and gained complete control of the eastern third of the continent. The defeat of France in America meant the American colonists no longer needed the British to protect them from the French. The war, however, left the British government with a large war debt that the British expected the colonies to help repay. Taxing the Colonies When he took the throne, George III was determined to deal more firmly with the American colonies. To help pay for the war, the king and his ministers levied taxes on tea, sugar, glass, paper, and other products. The Stamp Act of 1765 imposed the first direct tax on the colonists. It required them to pay a tax on legal documents, pamphlets, newspapers, and even dice and playing cards. Parliament also passed laws to control colonial trade in ways that benefited Great Britain but not the colonies. Colonial resentment, however, grew along with the revenues. Political protests began to spread throughout the colonies. Colonists refused to buy British goods. This move led to the repeal of the Stamp Act, but the British passed other tax laws to replace it. In 1773 a group of colonists, dressed as Mohawk, dumped 342 chests of British tea into Boston Harbor. This protest against further taxes on tea became known as the Boston Tea Party. In retaliation Parliament passed the Coercive Acts, which the colonists called the Intolerable Acts. One of these acts closed Boston Harbor. Another withdrew the right of the Massachusetts colony to govern itself. By the early 1770s, events clearly showed that revolution was not far off. Making a Difference With a firm reliance on the protection of divine Providence, Making a Difference The Signers of the Declaration we mutually pledge to each other our lives, our fortunes, and our sacred honor. For many who signed the Declaration, achieving that goal came at great personal cost. His health ruined, he died soon after being released. The New York home of signer Francis Lewis was plundered, and his wife was taken prisoner. Badly mistreated, she died less than two years after her release. William Floyd of New York was forced to flee with his family after the British occupied his home. He remained a refugee for seven years, living on the charity of friends. Altogether, the homes of 14 signers were invaded, their property destroyed, and their families forced to flee. Robert Morris of Pennsylvania used a large portion of his own wealth to keep American troops in the field. Without their courage, independence could not have been achieved. CHAPTER 2 ORIGINS OF AMERICAN GOVERNMENT 43 Growing Distrust Civic Rights New British laws caused discontent among colonists who believed their civic rights were being denied. These commit tees consisted of colonists who wanted to keep in touch with one another as events unfolded. Virginia and other colonies soon joined in this communication network. At the same time, each of the colonies developed largely on its own. Indeed, early attempts to bring the colonies together had failed. By the 1760s the harsh new British policies spurred an American sense of community. This was the first meeting organized by the colonies to protest King Georges actions. Delegates from all the colonies except Georgia met in Philadelphia on September 5, 1774, for the First Continental Congress. Key colonial leaders such as Patrick Henry, Samuel Adams, Richard Henry Lee, and George Washington attended. They also proposed a meeting the following year if Britain did not change its policies. Events then moved quickly. The British adopt ed stronger measures. Blows must decide whether they are to be subject to this country or independent. The first blow fell early on the morning of April 19, 1775. This clash, later called the shot heard round the world, was the first battle of the Revolutionary War. This Congress assumed the powers of a central government. It chose John Hancock as president, voted to organize an army and navy and to issue money, and made George Washington commander of a newly organizing Continental Army. It purchased supplies, negotiated treaties, and rallied support for the colonists cause. A brilliant pamphlet titled Common Sense, written by Thomas Paine, influenced many colonists. Critical Thinking The desire to operate a government independent of outside influence is common around the world. The statue was later melted down into bullets to be used against the kings troops. Why was the Declaration of Independence revolutionary Lap desk Jefferson used to draft the Declaration of Independence The views of patriot Samuel Adams also influenced the colonists. Adams asked, Is not America already independent Why not then declare it In June 1776, more than a year after fighting had begun in the colonies, Richard Henry Lee of Virginia did just that. The Declaration of Independence After Lees resolution, the Congress promptly named a committee composed of John Adams, Benjamin Franklin, Thomas Jefferson, Robert Livingston, and Roger Sherman to prepare a written declaration of independence. The committee asked Thomas Jefferson, a Virginia planter known for his writing skills, to write the draft. On June 28 the committee submitted the edited draft to the Congress. On July 2, 1776, the Congress approved Lees resolution. The colonies had officially broken with Great Britain. After considerable debate, a few passages were removed and some editorial changes were made. John Hancock, the president of the 46 CHAPTER 2 ORIGINS OF AMERICAN GOVERNMENT Congress, was the first to sign the document, which eventually held the signatures of all 56 delegates. Key Parts of the Declaration The American Declaration of Independence1 is one of the most famous documents in history. Jefferson later wrote I did not consider it any part of my charge to invent new ideas, but to place before mankind the common sense of the subject in terms so plain and firm as to command their assent . It was intended to be an expression of the American mind. Thomas Jefferson See the following footnoted materials in the Reference Handbook 1. Declaration of Independence, pages 770773. The revolutionary document stirred the hearts of the American people. The Declaration won praise the world over and influenced the French Revolution of 1789. Over the years many nations, particularly in Latin America, have used it as a model in their own efforts to gain freedom. The Declaration has three parts. That to secure these rights, Governments are instituted among Men, deriving their just powers from the consent of the governed . The middle section of the Declaration lists specific complaints against George III. Each item describes a violation of the colonists political, civil, and economic liberties. These paragraphs were de signed to justify the break with Great Britain. Their efforts to reach a peaceful solution to their problems had failed, leaving them no choice but to declare their freedom. Thus, the states saw themselves as states in the sense in which this term is used in Chapter 1. About two months before the Declaration of Independence, the Second Continental Congress had instructed each of the colonies to form such governments as shall best conduce lead to the happiness and safety of their constituents. Within a few years every former colony had a new constitution or had converted the old colonial charters into state constitutions. Most of the new constitutions contained a bill of rights defining the personal liberties of citizens. All recognized the people as the sole source of authority in a limited government with only those powers given by the people.
