The pro shouted curses and testers threats at the Confederation Congress, which was meeting inside. At last report the congressmen have left the city and will reconvene the government at Prince ton, New Jersey. Continental soldier 48 CHAPTER 2 ORIGINS OF AMERICAN GOVERNMENT resolution for independence in June 1776, he also proposed that a plan for confederation be prepared for the colonies. The states wanted a confederation, or league of friendship, among the 13 independent states rather than a strong national government. By March 1781, all 13 states had ratified, or approved, the Articles of Confederation. Government Under the Articles Under the Articles, the plan for the central government was simple. There was no federal court system. Congress settled disputes among states. Congress had only those powers expressed in the Articles. All other powers remained with the independent states. See the following footnoted materials in the Reference Handbook 1. Articles of Confederation, pages 808811. Weaknesses of the Articles Although the Articles of Confederation gave Congress power, they created a weak national government. Because each state had no intention of giving up its sovereignty to a central government, the Articles had weaknesses. First, Congress did not have the power to levy or collect taxes. Each state had to collect taxes from its citizens and turn the money over to the national treasury. Second, Congress did not have the power to regulate trade. Third, Congress could not force anyone to obey the laws it passed or to abide by the Articles of Confederation. Congress could only advise and request the states to comply. Fourth, laws needed the approval of 9 of the 13 states. Usually, delegates from only 9 or 10 states were in Congress at any time, making it difficult to pass laws. Also, each state had only a single vote. The votes of any 5 of the smaller states could block a measure that 8 of the larger states wanted. Government Under the Articles of Confederation Government Under the Articles of Confederation VIRGINIA SOUTH CAROLINA CONNECTICUT RHODE ISLAND Sovereign state governments had power DELAWARE PENNSYLVANIA NORTH CAROLINA To enforce or impede national government policy To control state militia To withhold or grant revenues to the national government To veto amendments to the Articles of Confederation To regulate foreign and interstate commerce GEORGIA MARYLAND NEW YORK MASSACHUSETTS NEW JERSEY NEW HAMPSHIRE Critical Thinking The Articles of Confederation established a league of cooperation among the 13 states, but the national government had only limited powers and was dependent on the states for revenue, soldiers, and law enforcement. In practice it was impossible to get all the states to agree on amendments. Sixth, the central government did not have an executive branch. The Confederation government carried on much of its business, such as selling western lands and establishing a postal system, through congressional committees. Without an executive, however, there was no unity in policy making and no way to coordinate the work of the different committees. Finally, the government had no national court system. Instead, state courts enforced and interpret ed national laws. A legislator from North Carolina addressed the powerlessness of the Con federation in a speech to his state legislature in 1787 The general government ought to possess the means of preserving the peace and tranquility of the union . A passport application can be obtained from your post office or from any federal or state court. There is a required fee, and two current, identical photos of your full face are needed to help prove who you are. You will also need a document, such as a birth certificate, to prove that you are a U.S. Instructions on the application detail the types of proof of citizenship that are acceptable. 50 Achievements Despite its weaknesses, the Confederation accomplished important tasks. The individual states ceded, or yield ed, their claims to these territories to the central government, providing a focus for national unity. Congress enacted two land ordinances, or laws, that provided for the organization of these territories. Another important accomplishment was a peace treaty with Great Britain. Under the terms of the treaty, signed in 1783, Britain recognized American independence. It is often the case that several weeks may pass before you receive your passport in the mail, so apply well in advance of the trip. Your passport will be valid for 5 or 10 years, depending on your age. Growing Unrest Past Government authorities often jailed debtor farmers or seized their property. Shays led armed men to capture and close the courts, stopping land confiscations. The structure of the central government could not coordinate the actions of the states effectively. Growing Problems Soon after the war, the states began to quarrel, mainly over boundary lines and tariffs. New Jersey farmers, for example, had to pay fees to sell their vegetables in New York. Congress could do little about these matters. Even worse, the new nation faced serious money problems. Without money, the government could not maintain an army for defense of the states. By 1786 an economic depression had left many farmers and small merchants angry and in debt. Armed groups of farmers forced several courts to close in order to prevent farm foreclosures and the loss of their farms. The men hoped that the state would pass laws allowing them to keep their farms through the depression. When their pleas brought no help from the justices, Shays gathered a force of 1200 men and advanced on the federal arsenal in Springfield. In a letter to George Washington, Knox wrote CHAPTER 2 ORIGINS OF AMERICAN GOVERNMENT 51 This dreadful situation has alarmed every man of principle and property in New England. In 1785 he invited representatives from both states to Mount Vernon to discuss differences over their currencies, import duties, and navigation on the Potomac River and Chesapeake Bay. Al though all states were invited, only five sent delegates. The stage was now set for what has been called the miracle at Philadelphia.
