S e c t i on 4 S e c t i on 4 The Constitutional Convention The Constitutional Convention began its work on May 25, 1787. The state legislatures appointed 74 delegates to the Convention, but only 55 attended. Of these, 39 signed the final constitution. John Hancock The Convention Begins The delegates had great practical experience in politics. Seven had served as governors of their states. Many had helped write their state constitutions. Several men stood out as leaders. The presence of George Washington ensured that many people would trust the Conventions work. Two other Pennsylvanians also played key roles. Madison is often called the Father of the Constitution because he was the author of the basic plan of government that the Convention eventually adopted. Organization The Convention began by unanimously choosing George Washington to preside over the meetings. It also decided that each state would have one vote on all questions. A simple majority vote of those states present would make decisions. No meetings could be CHAPTER 2 ORIGINS OF AMERICAN GOVERNMENT 53 held unless delegates from at least seven of the 13 states were present. The delegates decided to keep the public and press from attending the sessions. The delegates reached a consensus on many basic issues. All favored the idea of limited and representative government. They agreed that the powers of the national government should be divided among legislative, executive, and judicial branches. They all believed it was necessary to limit the power of the states to coin money or to interfere with creditors rights. And all of them agreed that they should strengthen the national government. The great debates and compromises of the Convention were not over these fundamental questions. Rather, they dealt with how to put these ideas into practice. It came from the Virginia delegation who presented a plan for a strong national government. They came to be called the Virginia Plan. By offering a complete plan at the very start, the nationalists set the direction and agenda for the rest of the Convention. Eventually, and after much discussion by delegates who required a 54 CHAPTER 2 ORIGINS OF AMERICAN GOVERNMENT number of modifications, the Virginia Plan be came the basis of the new Constitution. The delegates debated the Virginia Plan for more than two weeks. The smaller states wanted a less powerful government with more independence for the states. A weak executive consisting of more than one person would be elected by Congress. A national judiciary with limited power would be appointed by the executive. Paterson argued that the Convention should not deprive the smaller states of the equality they had under the Articles. Thus, his plan was designed simply to amend the Articles. Soon the Convention was dead locked over the question of the representation of states in Congress. The Connecticut Compromise Finally, a special committee designed a compromise. The compromise suggested that the legislative branch have two parts (1) a House of Representatives, with state representation based on population. The smaller states would be protect ed in the Senate, where each state would have equal representation. At the same time, the Southern states did not want enslaved persons counted at all for levying taxes. They wanted the enslaved persons counted for tax purposes but not for representation. The ThreeFifths Compromise settled this deadlock. The Northern states wanted the government to have complete power over trade with other nations. The Southern states depended heavily on agricultural exports. They feared that business interests in the North might have enough votes in Congress to set up trade agreements that would hurt them. They also feared the North might interfere with the slave trade. Again, a compromise settled the issue. At the same time, they gave Congress the power to regulate both interstate commerce, or trade among the states, and foreign commerce. Leaders, like Thomas Jefferson, (left) accepted slavery as a social norm. As a result, the United States is one of the few nations in the world today that does not tax its exports. The Slavery Question The word slave does not appear in the Constitution. Whatever their personal beliefs about slavery, the delegates knew that the Southern states would never accept the Constitution if it interfered with slavery. Thus, in order to create the badly needed new government, the Founders compromised on See the following footnoted materials in the Reference Handbook 1. The Constitution, pages 774799. CHAPTER 2 ORIGINS OF AMERICAN GOVERNMENT 55 the slavery question. Their refusal to deal with slavery left it to later generations of Americans to resolve this great and terrible issue. On September 8, 1787, a Committee of Style and Arrangements began polishing the final draft. By September 17 the document was ready. The aging Ben Franklin had to be helped to the table to sign. But now at length I have the happiness to know, he said, it is a rising and not a setting Sun. Ratifying the Constitution For the new Constitution to become law, 9 of the 13 states had to ratify it. The political debate over ratification lasted until May 29, 1790, when Rhode Island finally voted for approval. The Constitution, however, actually went into effect on June 21, 1788, when New Hampshire became the ninth state to ratify it. The Federalists and AntiFederalists The great debate over ratification quickly divided the people in the states. Fervent debates broke out in the newspapers. The other group, called the Anti Federalists, opposed the new Constitution. The lines of support, however, were not clearly drawn, and many city and business people agreed with the opponents of the Constitution. The Convention had considered including such a bill. They demanded that the new Constitution clearly guarantee the peoples freedoms. Patrick Henry was a strong opponent of the Constitution. He stated Ratifying the Constitution Ratifying the Constitution Unanimously ratified Strongly supported ratification Substantially opposed ratification Ratified after the Constitution became fully effective MASSACHUSETTS Feb. 6, 1788 NEW YORK July 26, 1788 NEW HAMPSHIRE June 21, 1788 RHODE ISLAND May 29, 1790 Ratification was originally defeated date represents second vote. PENNSYLVANIA Dec. 12, 1787 CONNECTICUT Jan. 9, 1788 VIRGINIA June 25, 1788 NEW JERSEY Dec. 18, 1787 DELAWARE Dec. 7, 1787 NORTH CAROLINA Nov. 21, 1789 MARYLAND April 28, 1788 SOUTH CAROLINA May 23, 1788 GEORGIA Jan. Patrick Henry, 1788 The Federalists, on the other hand, argued that without a strong national government, anarchy, or political disorder, would triumph. They also claimed that a Bill of Rights was not needed since eight states already had such bills in their state constitutions. To gain the necessary support, however, the Federalists promised to add a Bill of Rights as the first order of business under a new government. Many small states ratified it quickly because they were pleased with equal representation in the new Senate. In Virginia, George Washington, James Madison, and Edmund Randolph helped swing a close vote on June 25, 1788. In New York, Alexander Hamilton argued the case for six weeks. Finally, on July 26, the Federalists in New York won by only three votes. Critical Thinking The Constitution survived strong opposition from a number of the original 13 states. Why were some states hesitant to ratify the Constitution To help win the battle in New York, Hamilton, Madison, and John Jay published more than 80 es says defending the new Constitution. Later they were collected in a book called The Federalist. 1 See the following footnoted materials in the Reference Handbook 1. The Federalist, No. 10, pages 812814 and The Federalist, No. 51, pages 815816. CHAPTER 2 ORIGINS OF AMERICAN GOVERNMENT 57 The Constitutional Debate Choosing Sides The woodcut shows the Ship of State being paraded by Federalists in support of the Constitution. Voters elected 22 senators and 59 representatives, and on March 4, 1789, Congress met for the first time in Federal Hall in New York. On April 30 Washington took the oath of office to become the first president of the United States. To fulfill the promises made during the fight for ratification, James Madison introduced a set of amendments during the first session of Congress. Congress approved 12 amendments and the states ratified 10 of them in 1791.
