S e c t i o n 1 S e c t i o n 1 Structure and Principles The Founders created the Constitution Readers Guide more than 200 years ago. The Constitution established a republic, in which power is held by voting citizens through their elected representatives. The success of this system of government depends on an informed, participating citizenry. It establishes the structure and powers of government but does not spell out every aspect of how government w ill function. CHAPTER 3 THE CONSTITUTION 63 The Preamble 062067 CH03S1860053 12104 138 AM Page 64 Seven Articles The Constitution contains seven divisions called articles. Each article covers a general topic. Most of the articles are divided into sections. Other sections of Article I spell out the procedures for making laws, list the types of laws Congress may pass, and specify the powers that Congress does not have. Article II creates an executive branch to carry out laws passed by Congress. Article II, Section 1, begins The executive Power shall be vested in a President of the United States of America. The section also gives the national government the power to create lower federal courts. Section 3 defines treason against the United States. Finally, Article VII addresses ratification and declares that the Constitution would take effect after it was ratified by nine states. The amendment process provides a way this document, written more than two centuries ago, can remain responsive to the needs of a changing nation. These principles continue to influence the character of American government. United States government is based upon the consent of the governed the authority for government flows from the people. The Constitution created a federal system of government. Under federalism, power is divided between national and state governments. Both levels have their own agencies and officials, and pass laws that directly affect citizens. Federalism gives the United States a flexible system of government See the following footnoted materials in the Reference Handbook 1. The Articles of Confederation, pages 808811. Federalism In this governmental system, power is divided between national and state governments. Separation of Powers Each of the three branches of government has its own responsibilities. Checks and Balances Each branch of government holds some control over the other two branches. Judicial Review Courts have power to declare laws and actions of Congress and the president unconstitutional. Limited Government The Constitution limits the powers of government by making explicit grants of authority. Critical Thinking The principles outlined in the Constitution were the Framers solution to the complex problems of a representative government. Which principle allows the president to veto legislation under which the national government has the power to act for the country as a whole, and states have power over many local matters. Separation of Powers The Constitution limits the central government by dividing power among the legislative, executive, and judicial branches. Under separation of powers, each branch has its responsibilities, a system that the Founders hoped would prevent any branch from gaining too much power. This system works in several ways. Senate confirms judges. President can recommend legislation to Congress, veto bills passed by Congress, and implement laws passed by Congress. PRESIDENT Executive function Critical Thinking The principle of checks and balances prevents one branch of government from becoming too powerful. In what ways does Congress check the Supreme Court Congress, for example, passes laws. The federal courts restrain Congress by ruling on the constitutionality of laws. This presidential power is balanced, in turn, by the Constitutions requirement that the Senate approve appointments. Checks and balances created a system of shared powers. Because the Constitution is the supreme law of the land, acts contrary to it must be void. The Founders did not explicitly give such power to the judicial branch. Madison 1 in 1803 established the precedent for federal courts to rule on the actions of the government. The principle of judicial review is important. A Supreme Court decision on the meaning of the Constitution can be changed only if the Court itself changes its views or if an amendment to the Constitution is passed. The first 10 amendments set specific limits in the areas of freedom of expression, personal security, and fair trials. In 1974 when President Richard Nixon resigned in the face of evidence that he had acted illegally, President Gerald Ford said My fellow Americans, our long national nightmare is over. Our Constitution works. Our great Republic is a government of laws and not of men. Here the people rule. Gerald Ford, 1974 .
