The House was to be the voice of the people, chosen by popular vote. Yet, in many ways, the House and Senate had equal powers. Article III established the judicial branch. It gave Congress authority to set up additional courts as the need arose. At the same time, however, they feared the abuse of power. 68 CHAPTER 3 THE CONSTITUTION 068075 CH03S2860053 12104 139 AM Page 69 Seats of Governmental Power Present The U.S. Capitol, located on Capitol Hill, is one of the nations most familiar landmarks. It contains the current Senate and House chambers. Past The first seat of Congress contained many symbols, such as an American eagle insignia and 13 arrows and the olive branch united, to mark it as a federal building. Symbols of Government What does the U.S. These powers are also called enumerated powers because they are numbered 118. This clause gives Congress the right to make all laws necessary and proper to carry out the powers expressed in the other clauses of Article I. It is called the elastic clause because it lets Congress stretch its powers to meet situations the Founders could never have anticipated. The issue was whether a strict or a broad interpretation of the Constitution should be applied. Maryland,1 when the Supreme Court ruled in favor of a broad interpretation. Congress Then and Now The first home of Congress was Federal Hall in lower Manhattan, New York. (It moved to Philadelphia near the end of the second year, 1790.) The House met down stairs the Senate, on the upper floor. Under the direction of Speaker Fredrick A. House members climbed the stairs and helped count the electoral votes that named George Washington and John Adams president and vice president. See the following footnoted materials in the Reference Handbook 1. McCulloch v. Maryland case summary, page 761. By 1795, four permanent committees had formed. By comparison, today a total of about 10,000 bills are introduced yearly. Members had other jobs or were wealthy enough not to work. Congress did not sit in continuous session until the mid twentieth century. The Executive Branch The office of the presidency was initiated in response to the weakness of the Articles of Confederation. It was significant that the office was described in the second, not the first, article of the Constitution. The Founders recognized the need for a strong executive to carry 70 CHAPTER 3 THE CONSTITUTION out the acts of Congress. The executive branch, they believed, could protect liberty, private property, and business. The Constitution grants the president broad but vaguely described powers. The exact meaning of the presidents power in specific situations is open to interpretation. Article II 1 begins simply by stating The executive Power shall be vested in a President of the United States of America. Some scholars call this sentence the wild card in the deck of presidential powers. What they mean is that this sentence may be played, or interpreted, in different ways, like a wild card in a card game. See the following footnoted materials in the Reference Handbook 1. The Constitution, pages 774 799. 068075 CH03S2860053 12104 139 AM Page 71 Specific Powers Sections 2 and 3 of Article II do define some presidential powers. Everyone knew, and even discussed openly at the Constitutional Convention, that George Washington was the likely choice. Washington did not seek the office. After two terms he retired to private life, stating that two terms were sufficient for anyone. Early presidents would not recognize the office today. President Washington had so little to do on some days that he advertised in the newspaper the times when he would entertain visitors. He held tea parties for anyone properly attired on Friday evenings. By 1800, when President Adams moved to Washington, D.C., the second presidents papers were packed in only seven boxes. In contrast, modern presidents schedules are timed minute by minute. The Chief Executive meets with officials on a tight schedule, often working into the night. A fleet of airplanes and helicopters stands ready to carry the president and close advisers to any part of the nation or the world. A Changing Office Presidential Leadership George Washington set many precedents as president. Washington, although a brilliant leader, was cautious. During the Civil War, President Lincoln boldly used measures to quiet opposition, even though such measures violated constitutional guarantees of free speech, press, and assembly. After naming the Supreme Court, the Constitution allows Congress to establish all inferior courts. The Framers were not concerned about the power of the justices, al lowing them to hold office for life. One system consists of the federal courts, whose powers derive from the Constitution and federal laws. The other includes the courts of each of the 50 states, whose powers derive from state constitutions and laws. This authority is known as the jurisdiction of the court. In the 1960s Sam married. This was the first national civil rights bill for people with disabilities. 72 CHAPTER 3 THE CONSTITUTION 068075 CH03S2860053 12104 140 AM Page 73 The Early Presidency chamber on the main floor of the Capitol. Madison in 1803. Thus, the act was unconstitutional. When it rules on constitutional issues, the Supreme Court cannot be overturned except by a constitutional amendment. Shared Power and Conflict The Constitution created three separate branches of government. The Roles of the President Shown here in The Republican Court by Daniel Huntington, the president held this reception in New York City in 1789 to honor his wife, Martha. In his spare time, Washington often entertained guests. Why have the presidents duties increased over the past 200 years The President as Legislator The executive and legislative branches must work together closely in order for legislation to become effective policy. In practice, the executive branch prov ides plans for much of the legislation that Congress considers. Article II, Section 3 The president proposes much of the legislative agenda and spells out the details of programs that are enacted into law. In order for programs to be CHAPTER 3 THE CONSTITUTION 73 068075 CH03S2860053 12104 140 AM Page 74 Quiet, Please! The delegates to the Constitutional Convention in Philadelphia really needed to concentrate on writing the Constitution. The sound of carriages and carts passing back and forth on cobblestone streets outside the Pennsylvania State House bothered the delegates. Therefore, they hired people to shovel dirt onto the street outside to muffle the noise. This often involves creation of a bureaucracy to carry out the details of policy. The President vs. The expansion of presidential power has changed the structure of the national government without formal changes in the Constitution. At other times, presidents have charged Congress with attempts to encroach upon executive power. Sometimes the two branches quarrel over the way the president interprets the w ill of Congress in bills it has passed. Occasionally, however, Congress has been accused of yielding too much power to the Chief Executive. For example, in 74 CHAPTER 3 THE CONSTITUTION 1935 the Supreme Court nullified the law creating the National Recovery Administration (NRA). In the majority opinion Chief Justice Hughes said Congress cannot delegate legislative power to the President to exercise an unfettered discretion to make whatever laws he thinks may be needed or advisable for the rehabilitation and expansion of trade or industry. Charles Evans Hughes, 1935 Finally, the development of political parties has created a source of conflict. Each party has a different agenda, different constituents to please, and even a different philosophy of government. At best, different parties in the executive and legislative branches develop carefully studied compromise policies. At worst, they develop gridlock in which nothing productive can be accomplished. Congress vs. Congress, however, has been The President and Congress Legislative Proposals President George W. Bush outlines his legislative proposals to Congress. The Senate, however, killed the bill. The Supreme Court vs. Occasionally, a president who disagrees with the Court may refuse to enforce its decision. In the 1830s, the Court upheld the rights of the Cherokee against the state of Georgia. 2. Define expressed powers, enumerated powers, elastic clause, federal bureaucracy. 3. Identify McCulloch v. Maryland. 4. Identify five powers of the president. 5. What two systems of courts make up the judiciary of the United States 6. How can Supreme Court decisions be overturned .
