The priceless heritage of the Constitution has been its ability to adapt to new conditions while preserving the basic form of American government. The words of Chief Justice John Marshall in 1819 remain true today We must never forget that it is a Constitution intended to endure for ages to come, and, consequently, to be adapted to the various crises of human affairs. John Marshall, 1819 The Amendment Process The Founders created a Constitution that could be adapted to a future they could not foresee. One way they provided for change was to describe how Congress and the states could amend the Constitution. As outlined in Article V, amendments may deal with any topic except that no state can lose equal representation in the Senate without the states consent. Regardless of the proposal and ratification methods used, however, the amendment process illustrates the federal system of American government. This is the only method that has been used to date. 76 CHAPTER 3 THE CONSTITUTION 076081 CH03S3860053 12104 141 AM Page 77 resolutions asking for constitutional amendments are introduced in Congress each year. In recent years, suggestions have been made to put limits on income taxes, to limit the tenure of Supreme Court justices to 12 years, and to give states complete control of oil deposits within their borders. This method has never been used, but in recent history it has almost occurred twice. The campaign failed, however, when no other states voted for the convention. By 2000 federal revenues exceeded expenses and most Americans lost inter est in a balanced budget amendment. The other is for each state to call a special ratifying convention. Why is the constitutional convention method of amending the Constitution controversial CHAPTER 3 THE CONSTITUTION 77 076081 CH03S3860053 12104 141 AM Page 78 Political Processes Congress approved the ERA in 1972, but it ran into opposition when it was sent to the states for ratification. Do you think the Framers of the Constitution made it too difficult to amend the Constitution Explain. Many constitutional scholars contended that the states revocations were unconstitutional. Delegates in each state ran for election statewide either on a pledge to support the amendment or on a pledge to reject it. In effect, this method gave the people a direct voice in the amending process. In modern times, Congress has set the limit at seven years. Congress can put the time limit either in the text of the amendment or in legislation that ac companies the amendment. Placing a time limit can alter the fate of an amendment. This process does not involve changes in the wording of 076081 CH03S3860053 12104 141 AM Page 79 the Constitution itself. Changes Through Law Congress has passed laws that have enlarged or clarified many of the Constitutions provisions. The Founders expected Congress to do this, and they gave it authority to spell out many details of the national government. Article I, for example, gives Congress the power to lay and collect taxes. The same is true of the executive branch that Article II of the Constitution established. Congress completed the judicial branch by passing the Judiciary Act of 1789. Changes Through Practices Congress has also shaped the Constitution by the way it has used its other powers. Article II states that The President, VicePresident, and all civil Officers of the United States shall be re moved from Office on Impeachment for, and Conviction of, Treason, Bribery, or other high Crimes and Misdemeanors. Anyone can initiate an amendment simply by writing a proposal for amending the Constitution to a member of Congress. Follow these guide lines when writing your proposal Explain what your proposed amendment will do. Explain why you believe it is needed and how the nation will benefit if it is ratified. Indicate what opposition you expect there to be to your amendment and why. Suggest arguments that could be used to reply to criticism of your amendment. CHAPTER 3 THE CONSTITUTION 79 076081 CH03S3860053 12104 142 AM Page 80 Veto Power Presidential Influence Clinton warns Congress that if they do not send me legislation that guarantees every American private health insurance you will force me to take this pen and veto the legislation. Presidential Succession In 1841 William Henry Harrison became the first president to die in office. But did Tyler actually become president, or would he merely act as president until the next election Tyler took the presidential oath of office. Yet in this century, presidents have been aggressive in requesting legislation from Congress. These practices have become important precedents for building the power of the president. Some advocate judicial restraint others argue for judicial activism. In other words, advocates of judicial restraint want the Court to leave the policy making to others. For example, in the 1930s conservative justices frequently took activist positions against government regulation of the economy. Since the 1940s, however, most activist policies have been in support of civil liberties. The Supreme Court has sometimes ruled that the Constitution means one thing and then, years later, reversed itself. More than a half century later, in 1954, the Court reversed its position when it decided to outlaw racial segregation in public schools. Political parties are a good example. Today parties help organize government and conduct elections. The amendments added to the Constitution and the changes achieved through precedent and practice have created a government that can respond to the conditions and needs of the times. Thus, this short, simple document has continued for more than two centuries to serve as the supreme law of the land.
