The first Congress quickly proposed 12 amendments and sent them to the states for ratification. In 1791 the states ratified 10 of the amendments, which became known as the Bill of Rights. When the Constitution was adopted, some state constitutions had bills of rights. First Amendment, 1791 The First Amendment protects the right of Americans to worship as they please, or to have no religion if they prefer. These principles are known as freedom of religion and separation of church and state. Citizens thus have the right to criticize 084093 CH03S4860053 12104 144 AM Page 85 government officials and decisions, and they are allowed to spread unpopular ideas. Freedom Within Limits The freedoms of speech and the press are not unlimited, however. For example, laws prohibit slander and libel. Libel is similar to slander, except that it applies to written or published statements. Courts have also held that speech should be responsible. The First Amendment also protects the right to assemble in groups and hold demonstrations. People may pass out pamphlets, hold meetings, and do other things that peaceably advertise their beliefs. Finally, the First Amendment protects the right to criticize government officials and their actions. The rights to sign petitions in support of an idea, to present those petitions to government officials, and to send letters to those officials are all protected. This amendment seems to support the right for citizens to own firearms, but it does not prevent Congress from regulating the interstate sale of weapons, nor has the Supreme Court applied the Second Amendment to the states. In times of war, however, Congress may require a home owner to house soldiers but only under conditions clearly spelled out by law. To guard against such searches and seizures, the Fourth Amendment protects the right to privacy. Police cannot simply conduct a general search or seizure hoping to find damaging evidence, or arrest someone on the chance that he or she might have committed a crime. To be lawful, a search or an arrest must be based on probable cause, meaning that police must have a reasonable basis to believe the person or premises is linked to a crime. A search or an arrest also usually requires a search warrant or an arrest warrant. Second, a person who is found innocent of a crime may not be tried again for the same offense. Third, no one may be forced to testify against himself or herself. Individuals can not be required to convict themselves. This means that the government must follow proper 86 CHAPTER 3 THE CONSTITUTION constitutional procedures in trials and in other actions it takes against individuals. The Supreme Court, however, has ruled that these rights also apply to people charged with crimes subject to state courts. The Sixth Amendment gives an accused person several important rights. The requirement that trials be conducted in public assures that justice is carried out in full view of the people. Although the amendment provides for trial by jury, an accused person may ask to be tried by a judge alone. The accused also may ask to have his or her trial moved to another community. The Sixth Amendment gives accused persons the right to know the charges against them, so that they may prepare a defense. Accused persons also have the right to hear and question all witnesses against them and the right to compel witnesses to appear at the trial and testify in their behalf. In addition, accused persons have the right to be defended by a lawyer. The Seventh Amendment The Seventh Amendment provides for the right to a jury trial in federal courts to settle all disputes about property worth more than 20. The judge sets bail in an amount that ensures the accused will appear for trial. When the trial ends, bail is returned. If the accused does not appear, bail is forfeited. Fines for serious crimes may be higher than those for less serious ones. Finally, the Eighth Amendment bans cruel and unusual punishment for crimes. The Eighth Amendment also has been used to limit the use of the death penalty in some circumstances. The amendment protects all basic or natural rights not specifically noted in the Constitution. The final amendment was intended to reaffirm the relation ship between the national and state governments. It confirms that the people and states have rights that the national government may not assume. Other Amendments The 27 amendments fall into 3 major groups. The first group, which includes the Bill of Rights, was added between 1791 and 1804 to put finishing touches on the original Constitution. The Eleventh and Twelfth Amendments also be long to this group. In 1793 two citizens of South Carolina had sued Georgia in the Supreme Court over property confiscated during the Revolution. The Georgia legislature maintained that a sovereign state could not be summoned into federal court and ordered to defend itself. When Georgia officials refused to appear for the trial, the Supreme Court decided against the state. How did the Civil War amendments expand civil rights in the nation CHAPTER 3 THE CONSTITUTION 87 084093 CH03S4860053 12104 144 AM Page 88 judiciary. Georgia 1 Congress introduced an amendment to limit the jurisdiction of the federal courts. This amendment provides for the Electoral College to use separate ballots in voting for president and vice president. The Thirteenth Amendment (1865) outlaws slavery, and the Fourteenth Amendment (1868) originally was intended to protect the legal rights of See the following footnoted materials in the Reference Handbook 1. Chisholm v. Georgia case summary, page 756. Which amendments are known as the Civil War amendments 88 CHAPTER 3 THE CONSTITUTION 084093 CH03S4860053 12104 144 AM Page 89 Amendments in Practice Present The Fourth Amendment protects citizens from unlawful searches and arrest by government authorities. Past The Eighteenth Amendment proved difficult to enforce and led to an illegal trade in alcohol. In Prohibition Raid, Thomas Hart Benton depicts police forcing the destruction of illegal alcohol. Enforcing Laws Explain why the Eighteenth Amendment may have been more difficult to en force than the Fourth Amendment. In addition, it states that all citizens have the right to equal protection of the law in all states. The Later Amendments The third group of amendments have all been added in the twentieth century. This decision prevented passage of another income tax law until after the constitutional amendment. However, in 1912 charges of vote buying in state legislatures aided in the passage of this amendment. The fol lowing year, the Nineteenth Amendment (1920) guaranteed women the right to vote. By then women had already won the right to vote in many state elections, but the amendment put their right to vote in all state and national elections on a constitutional basis. Under the original Constitution, elected officials who retired or who had been defeated remained in office for several months. The amendment addressed and in most cases solved this problem by ending the terms of senators and representatives on January 3, and the term of the president on January 20 in the year following their November elections. It was passed largely as a reaction to Franklin D. The District of Columbia now has three presidential electors, the number to which it would be entitled if it were a state. It also sets procedures for filling a vacancy in the office of the vice president.
