Defying a federal court order, Wallace had stood in a doorway at the university, blocking two African American students. Wallace attempts to block desegregation Few confrontations between the state and national governments are as dramatic as the one at the University of Alabama in 1963. Nevertheless, national and state powers have been continually redefined through conflict, compromise, and cooperation since the earliest days of the republic. Finally, the Constitution specifically denied some powers to each level of government. The Constitution has preserved the basic de sign of federalism, or the division of government powers, over the years. The American concept of federalism, however, has changed greatly since 1787. Federalism is not a static relationship be tween different levels of government. An understanding of federalism must begin with the Constitution. National Powers The Constitution grants three types of power to the national government ex pressed, implied, and inherent powers. Expressed Powers The expressed powers are those powers directly expressed or stated in the Constitution by the Founders. Expressed powers are also called enumerated powers. While not specifically listed, implied powers spring from and depend upon the expressed powers. The flag is usually flown only from dawn to dusk. If displayed at night, it should be lighted. In a group of flags, the U.S. Inside, the flag may hang flat against the wall behind a speaker, with the stars on the left. If on a staff, it should be on the viewers left. Any other flags should be placed to the right. The flag may be flown upside down only to signal distress. Remember that, as the symbol of the United States, the flag should be treated with respect. Thus, Congress has used the implied powers to regulate nuclear power plants and to develop the space program. In The Federalist, No. 45, James Madison argued that in fact it granted few and limited powers to the national government while the states powers were many and broadly drawn. The Constitution also reserves certain powers strictly to the states. These are called reserved powers. What powers are shared by the national and state governments powers specifically, it grants to the states those powers not delegated to the United States by the Constitution, nor prohibited by it to the states. The Supremacy Clause What happens when states exceed their reserved powers and pass laws that conflict with national laws Which law is supreme Article VI, Section 2, of the Constitution makes the acts and treaties of the United States supreme. For this reason it is called the supremacy clause. This clause states This Constitution, and the Laws of the United States which shall be made in Pursuance thereof, and all treaties made under the Authority of the United States, shall be the supreme Law of the Land and the Judges in every State shall be bound thereby. Article VI, Section 2 No state law or state constitution may conflict with any form of national law. Article VI also re quires that all national and state officials and judges be bound to support the Constitution. State officials are not permitted to use their states re served powers to interfere with the Constitution. States create local governments such as those of cities and counties. As such, local governments get their powers from the states. Concurrent Powers The federal government and the states also have certain concurrent powers. Concurrent powers are those powers that both the national government and the states have. Examples of concurrent powers are the power to tax, to maintain courts and define crimes, and to appropriate private property for public use. These three obligations are outlined in Article IV, Sections 3 and 4.2 Republican Form of Government First, the national government must guarantee each state a republican form of government. Enforcement of this guarantee has become a congressional responsibility. When Congress allows senators and representatives from a state to take their seats in Congress, it is in effect ruling that the state has a re publican form of government. Why did federal and state authorities have to cooperate after the bombing of the federal building in Oklahoma City Constitution for the national government. Of course, state actions must not conflict with any national laws. Article I, Section 9,1 enumerates those things the national government cannot do. For ex ample, the national government cannot tax ex ports, and it cannot interfere with the ability of states to carry out their responsibilities. No state can make treaties or alliances with foreign governments. At that time, some Southern states had refused to ratify the Civil War amendments granting citizenship rights to African Americans. Congress ruled that these states did not have a republican form of government. It refused to seat senators and representatives from those states until the states ratified the Civil War amendments and changed their laws to recognize African Americans rights. An attack by a foreign power on one state is considered an attack on the United States. The Constitution, pages 774799. 2. The Constitution, pages 774799. During the strike, rioters had threatened federal property and interfered with mail delivery. Eisenhower sent troops to Little Rock, Arkansas, in 1957 when local officials failed to integrate public schools. Kennedy used troops at the University of Mississippi in 1962 and the University of Alabama in 1963. When one of these disasters strikes, the president often orders troops to aid disaster victims. The admission of West Virginia as a state in 1863 may be considered an exception to this rule. There are two restrictions on this power. First, as noted earlier, no state may be formed by taking territory from one or more states without the consent of the states involved and of Congress. Second, acts of admission, like all laws, are subject to presidential veto. The procedure for admission begins when Congress passes an enabling act. An enabling act, when signed by the president, enables the people of the territory interested in becoming a state to prepare a constitution. Then, after the constitution has been drafted and approved by a popular vote in the area, it is submitted to Congress. Since the original 13 states formed the Union, Congress has admitted new states under a variety of circumstances. Two states, West Virginia and Texas, were admitted under unusual circumstances. The State Capitol has stood in Oklahoma City since 1910. The Supreme Court has ruled that the president or Congress may impose conditions for admission of a state. In the case of Arizona, once it was admitted as a state, it promptly amended its constitution to restore provisions about the recall of judges that Taft had requested be deleted. The Supreme Court, however, upheld the right of Oklahoma to move the capital to Oklahoma City in 1911. The Court declared West Virginia was created from 40 western counties of Virginia that broke away when Virginia seceded from the Union. Some people have argued that the admission of West Virginia was a violation of the Constitution because the Virginia legislature did not give its consent. It held that the western representatives were the only legal acting Virginia legislature at that time. Texas won independence from Mexico and sought annexation to the United States for several years before being admitted. Texas was annexed to the United States by a joint resolution of Congress in 1845. The joint resolution provided for immediate statehood, al lowing Texas to skip the territorial period. It also stated that Texas could be divided into as many as five states with the approval of both Texas and the United States. The last two states to be admitted, Alaska and Hawaii, shortened the admission process. They each adopted a proposed constitution without waiting for an enabling act. Both were admitted in 1959. No state has more privileges or fewer obligations than any other. Each state is also legally separate from every other state in the Union. All states in the Union are bound to support the Constitution. In 1908 President Theodore Roosevelt first called the nations governors together to discuss conservation. After that the governors began to meet regularly as the Governors Conference to deal with a variety of issues. Working Within the System Contacting a legislator Do we truly have government by and for the people If so, how can citizens make their opinions known Can you work with in the system to change a law that you believe is unjust Your opinion will carry more influence if you join with others. Choose an appropriate means of expressing your views. To question a local ordinance, attend a city council meeting. You could write letters to the editor or prepare an editorial for a local radio or television broadcast. The Internet also offers an avenue through which citizens can speak out on an issue. Express whether you strongly agree or disagree in a letter to the news papers editor. In addition, the states play a key role in the process of amending the Constitution. The Courts as Umpire Because federalism divides the powers of government, conflicts frequently arise be tween national and state governments. In 1819, in the landmark case of McCulloch v. Maryland,1 the Supreme Court ruled on a conflict between a state government and the national government. The Courts view of this division has shifted through the years depending on the mood of the nation and on the number of conservative and liberal justices on the Court. Early in its history, the Court usually favored states power. During the Depression and the civil rights movement, the Court tended to favor a strong national government. Since the 1990s, a narrow majority of conservative justices has again generally ruled in favor of the states. For example, in United States v. Lopez (1995), the Court held that Congress had exceeded its authority over the states by passing a law banning gun possession in or near schools. Federal judges also serve as umpires of federal ism when they review the actions of state and local governments. In recent decades the power of federal judges has increased because of modern interpretations of the Fourteenth Amendment, which prohibits states from depriving any person of life, liberty, or property without due process of law. Broad interpretation of these words makes nearly every action by state and local officials open to questioning by a federal judge. See the following footnoted materials in the Reference Handbook 1. McCulloch v. Maryland case summary, page 761. Section 1 Assessment Section 1 Assessment Checking for Understanding 1. Main Idea Using a graphic organizer like the one at the right, give an example of each kind of power granted to the national government. Define delegated powers, expressed powers, Critical Thinking 5. Making Comparisons How do the obligations of the national government to states compare to obligations of states to the national government implied powers, elastic clause, inherent powers, reserved powers, supremacy clause, concurrent powers, enabling act. 3. Identify necessary and proper clause, McCulloch v. Maryland. 4. What kinds of powers may states exercise Federalism New states coming into the Union have had to follow a process established by Congress. Beginning with the enabling act passed by Congress, create a flow chart that shows the dates and conditions by which your state was admitted to the Union. Originally Brown had been serving a 5year sentence for robbery in Florida. When he was caught, Florida officials at first wanted Brown returned to serve his remaining sentence. Conflicts and jealousies among the states had been a major reason for drafting the Constitution in 1787. Because each state retains much power and independence, these rules help to assure cooperation among the states. Full Faith and Credit The Constitution states that full faith and credit shall be given in each state to the public acts, records, and judicial proceedings of every other state. For example, a car registration of one state must be accepted by all the other states. One state can not enforce another states criminal laws. The need for this kind of rule in the federal system is obvious. Without it, each state could treat all other states like foreign countries. The coverage of the full faith and credit rule is quite broad. Included, however, are rights to pass through or live in any state use the courts make contracts buy, sell, and hold property and marry. On the other hand, states may make reasonable discrimination against non residents. Some states require that a person live in a state for a certain amount of time before becoming a voter or public official. Records means such documents as mortgages, deeds, leases, wills, marriage licenses, car registrations, and birth certificates. The phrase judicial proceedings refers to various court actions such as judgments to pay a debt. Judicial decisions in civil matters in one state will be honored and enforced in all states. If, for ex ample, a person in Texas loses a lawsuit requiring a specific payment, and moves to Illinois to avoid paying the money, Illinois courts will enforce the Texas decision. A citizen of Delaware, for example, might be treated as an alien in Virginia or Maryland. Article IV, Section 2 This clause provides for the extradition of fugitives. Congress has made the governor of the state to which fugitives have fled responsible for re turning them. Although extradition is routine in the vast majority of cases, occasionally a governor will refuse. For example, a Michigan governor once re fused to return a fugitive to Arkansas because, the governor said, prison conditions in Arkansas were inhumane. Arkansas officials could do nothing about the governors decision. Interstate Compacts The Constitution re quires the states to settle their differences with one another without the use of force. Such compacts are written agreements between two or more states. Congress must approve interstate compacts. This requirement prevents states from threatening the Union by making alliances among themselves. Once a compact has been signed and approved by Congress, it is binding on all states signing it. Its terms are enforceable by the Supreme Court. Before 1900, only 13 interstate compacts had received congressional approval. Most of them involved boundary disputes between states. Today nearly 200 compacts are in force. States use compacts to deal with such matters as air and water pollution, pest control, toll bridges, and transportation. Many compacts today deal with the development and conservation of natural resources. Others deal with the transport and disposal of hazardous waste materials. Lawsuits Between States Sometimes states are unable to resolve their disputes by these or other methods. When this happens, an interstate lawsuit may result. Suits among two or more states are heard in the United States Supreme Court, the only court in which one state may sue another. States bring one another to court for a variety of reasons. Cases in the West often involve water rights. Arizona, California, and Colorado have gone to the Court in disputes over water from the Colorado River. Other cases have involved sewage from one state polluting the water in another state. Arkansas and Tennessee had such a dispute as recently as 1970.
