Section 2, of the Constitution makes the acts and treaties of the United States supreme. For this reason it is called the supremacy clause. This clause states This Constitution, and the Laws of the United States which shall be made in Pursuance thereof, and all treaties made under the Authority of the United States, shall be the supreme Law of the Land and the Judges in every State shall be bound thereby. Article VI, Section 2 No state law or state constitution may conflict with any form of national law. Article VI also re quires that all national and state officials and judges be bound to support the Constitution. State officials are not permitted to use their states re served powers to interfere with the Constitution. States create local governments such as those of cities and counties. As such, local governments get their powers from the states. Concurrent Powers The federal government and the states also have certain concurrent powers. Concurrent powers are those powers that both the national government and the states have. Examples of concurrent powers are the power to tax, to maintain courts and define crimes, and to appropriate private property for public use. These three obligations are outlined in Article IV, Sections 3 and 4.2 Republican Form of Government First, the national government must guarantee each state a republican form of government. Enforcement of this guarantee has become a congressional responsibility. When Congress allows senators and representatives from a state to take their seats in Congress, it is in effect ruling that the state has a re publican form of government. Why did federal and state authorities have to cooperate after the bombing of the federal building in Oklahoma City Constitution for the national government. Of course, state actions must not conflict with any national laws. Article I, Section 9,1 enumerates those things the national government cannot do. For ex ample, the national government cannot tax ex ports, and it cannot interfere with the ability of states to carry out their responsibilities. No state can make treaties or alliances with foreign governments. At that time, some Southern states had refused to ratify the Civil War amendments granting citizenship rights to African Americans. Congress ruled that these states did not have a republican form of government. It refused to seat senators and representatives from those states until the states ratified the Civil War amendments and changed their laws to recognize African Americans rights. An attack by a foreign power on one state is considered an attack on the United States. The Constitution, pages 774799. 2. The Constitution, pages 774799. During the strike, rioters had threatened federal property and interfered with mail delivery. Eisenhower sent troops to Little Rock, Arkansas, in 1957 when local officials failed to integrate public schools. Kennedy used troops at the University of Mississippi in 1962 and the University of Alabama in 1963. When one of these disasters strikes, the president often orders troops to aid disaster victims. The admission of West Virginia as a state in 1863 may be considered an exception to this rule. There are two restrictions on this power. First, as noted earlier, no state may be formed by taking territory from one or more states without the consent of the states involved and of Congress. Second, acts of admission, like all laws, are subject to presidential veto. The procedure for admission begins when Congress passes an enabling act. An enabling act, when signed by the president, enables the people of the territory interested in becoming a state to prepare a constitution. Then, after the constitution has been drafted and approved by a popular vote in the area, it is submitted to Congress. Since the original 13 states formed the Union, Congress has admitted new states under a variety of circumstances. Two states, West Virginia and Texas, were admitted under unusual circumstances. The State Capitol has stood in Oklahoma City since 1910. The Supreme Court has ruled that the president or Congress may impose conditions for admission of a state. In the case of Arizona, once it was admitted as a state, it promptly amended its constitution to restore provisions about the recall of judges that Taft had requested be deleted. The Supreme Court, however, upheld the right of Oklahoma to move the capital to Oklahoma City in 1911. The Court declared West Virginia was created from 40 western counties of Virginia that broke away when Virginia seceded from the Union. Some people have argued that the admission of West Virginia was a violation of the Constitution because the Virginia legislature did not give its consent. It held that the western representatives were the only legal acting Virginia legislature at that time. Texas won independence from Mexico and sought annexation to the United States for several years before being admitted. Texas was annexed to the United States by a joint resolution of Congress in 1845. The joint resolution provided for immediate statehood, al lowing Texas to skip the territorial period. It also stated that Texas could be divided into as many as five states with the approval of both Texas and the United States. The last two states to be admitted, Alaska and Hawaii, shortened the admission process. They each adopted a proposed constitution without waiting for an enabling act. Both were admitted in 1959. No state has more privileges or fewer obligations than any other. Each state is also legally separate from every other state in the Union. All states in the Union are bound to support the Constitution. In 1908 President Theodore Roosevelt first called the nations governors together to discuss conservation. After that the governors began to meet regularly as the Governors Conference to deal with a variety of issues. Working Within the System Contacting a legislator Do we truly have government by and for the people If so, how can citizens make their opinions known Can you work with in the system to change a law that you believe is unjust Your opinion will carry more influence if you join with others. Choose an appropriate means of expressing your views. To question a local ordinance, attend a city council meeting. You could write letters to the editor or prepare an editorial for a local radio or television broadcast. The Internet also offers an avenue through which citizens can speak out on an issue. Express whether you strongly agree or disagree in a letter to the news papers editor. In addition, the states play a key role in the process of amending the Constitution. The Courts as Umpire Because federalism divides the powers of government, conflicts frequently arise be tween national and state governments. In 1819, in the landmark case of McCulloch v. Maryland,1 the Supreme Court ruled on a conflict between a state government and the national government. The Courts view of this division has shifted through the years depending on the mood of the nation and on the number of conservative and liberal justices on the Court. Early in its history, the Court usually favored states power. During the Depression and the civil rights movement, the Court tended to favor a strong national government. Since the 1990s, a narrow majority of conservative justices has again generally ruled in favor of the states. For example, in United States v. Lopez (1995), the Court held that Congress had exceeded its authority over the states by passing a law banning gun possession in or near schools. Federal judges also serve as umpires of federal ism when they review the actions of state and local governments. In recent decades the power of federal judges has increased because of modern interpretations of the Fourteenth Amendment, which prohibits states from depriving any person of life, liberty, or property without due process of law. Broad interpretation of these words makes nearly every action by state and local officials open to questioning by a federal judge. See the following footnoted materials in the Reference Handbook 1. McCulloch v. Maryland case summary, page 761. Section 1 Assessment Section 1 Assessment Checking for Understanding 1. Main Idea Using a graphic organizer like the one at the right, give an example of each kind of power granted to the national government. Define delegated powers, expressed powers, Critical Thinking 5. Making Comparisons How do the obligations of the national government to states compare to obligations of states to the national government implied powers, elastic clause, inherent powers, reserved powers, supremacy clause, concurrent powers, enabling act. 3. Identify necessary and proper clause, McCulloch v. Maryland. 4. What kinds of powers may states exercise Federalism New states coming into the Union have had to follow a process established by Congress. Beginning with the enabling act passed by Congress, create a flow chart that shows the dates and conditions by which your state was admitted to the Union. Originally Brown had been serving a 5year sentence for robbery in Florida. When he was caught, Florida officials at first wanted Brown returned to serve his remaining sentence. Conflicts and jealousies among the states had been a major reason for drafting the Constitution in 1787. Because each state retains much power and independence, these rules help to assure cooperation among the states. Full Faith and Credit The Constitution states that full faith and credit shall be given in each state to the public acts, records, and judicial proceedings of every other state. For example, a car registration of one state must be accepted by all the other states. One state can not enforce another states criminal laws. The need for this kind of rule in the federal system is obvious. Without it, each state could treat all other states like foreign countries. The coverage of the full faith and credit rule is quite broad. Included, however, are rights to pass through or live in any state use the courts make contracts buy, sell, and hold property and marry. On the other hand, states may make reasonable discrimination against non residents. Some states require that a person live in a state for a certain amount of time before becoming a voter or public official. Records means such documents as mortgages, deeds, leases, wills, marriage licenses, car registrations, and birth certificates. The phrase judicial proceedings refers to various court actions such as judgments to pay a debt. Judicial decisions in civil matters in one state will be honored and enforced in all states. If, for ex ample, a person in Texas loses a lawsuit requiring a specific payment, and moves to Illinois to avoid paying the money, Illinois courts will enforce the Texas decision. A citizen of Delaware, for example, might be treated as an alien in Virginia or Maryland. Article IV, Section 2 This clause provides for the extradition of fugitives. Congress has made the governor of the state to which fugitives have fled responsible for re turning them. Although extradition is routine in the vast majority of cases, occasionally a governor will refuse. For example, a Michigan governor once re fused to return a fugitive to Arkansas because, the governor said, prison conditions in Arkansas were inhumane. Arkansas officials could do nothing about the governors decision. Interstate Compacts The Constitution re quires the states to settle their differences with one another without the use of force. Such compacts are written agreements between two or more states. Congress must approve interstate compacts. This requirement prevents states from threatening the Union by making alliances among themselves. Once a compact has been signed and approved by Congress, it is binding on all states signing it. Its terms are enforceable by the Supreme Court. Before 1900, only 13 interstate compacts had received congressional approval. Most of them involved boundary disputes between states. Today nearly 200 compacts are in force. States use compacts to deal with such matters as air and water pollution, pest control, toll bridges, and transportation. Many compacts today deal with the development and conservation of natural resources. Others deal with the transport and disposal of hazardous waste materials. Lawsuits Between States Sometimes states are unable to resolve their disputes by these or other methods. When this happens, an interstate lawsuit may result. Suits among two or more states are heard in the United States Supreme Court, the only court in which one state may sue another. States bring one another to court for a variety of reasons. Cases in the West often involve water rights. Arizona, California, and Colorado have gone to the Court in disputes over water from the Colorado River. Other cases have involved sewage from one state polluting the water in another state. Arkansas and Tennessee had such a dispute as recently as 1970. Section 2 Assessment Section 2 Assessment Checking for Understanding 1. Main Idea In a chart, list three ways states treat nonresidents differently and the same as residents. Treated the same Treated differently 1. 2. 3. 2. Define extradite, civil law, interstate compact. 3. 4. What three constitutional provisions are aimed at promoting cooperation among the states Critical Thinking 5. Find out if and how a drivers license, automobile registration, and voting registration are changed. Write a report on your findings. Earlier, the group had asked Congress to give states the right to collect sales taxes on Internet commerce based on the tax rates of customers home states. To gain the governors support, the bills authors agreed to reduce the length of the delay from six to three years. While they deeply believed that the United States needed a strong central government to survive, they also knew that many people feared the centralization of power. The colonial experience with the power of British government was still fresh in peoples minds. This fully corresponds with the idea of a federal government. States Rightists Versus Nationalists Throughout American history, there have been two quite different views of how federalism should operate. The States Rights Position The states rights view holds that the Constitution is a com pact among the states. States rightists argue that the states created the national government and gave it only certain limited powers. Any doubt about whether a power belongs to the nation al government or is reserved to the states should be settled in favor of the states. Because the national government is an agent of the states, all of its powers should be narrowly defined. At various points in United States history, the Supreme Court has accepted this view. Under Chief Justice Roger B. Taney (18361864), the Court often supported states rights against powers of the national government. Maryland. The Nationalist Position The nationalist position rejects the idea of the Constitution as merely a compact among the states. Nationalists deny that the national government is an agent of the states. They hold that the necessary and proper clause of the Constitution means that Congress has the right to adopt any means that are convenient and useful to carry out its delegated powers. They also claim that the reserved powers of the states should not limit how the national government can use its own powers. They are U.S. In the past 30 years, public support for statehood has increased on the island. They look to the national government to take the lead in solving major social and economic problems facing the nation. The Supreme Court established the nationalist position in 1819 in McCulloch v. Maryland, but it re ally gained ground in the Court during the late 1930s. At that time, the Great Depression gripped the nation. Roosevelt responded by starting new social welfare and public works programs. It supported the expansion of the national governments powers in order to deal with the nations terrible economic problems. Growing National Government A major factor shaping the development of American federalism has been the growth in the size and power of the national government. War Powers The national government has power to wage war. Commerce Power The Constitution gives Congress the authority to regulate commerce. Supreme Court decisions have expanded this power. For example, Congress passed the Civil Rights Act of 1964 forbidding racial discrimination in public accommodations such as hotels and restaurants. Congress does, however, have authority to raise taxes and spend money for such purposes. The Sixteenth Amendment, ratified in 1913, gave Congress the power to tax incomes. It has given the national government much greater financial resources than any state or local government has. For example, Congress has put such heavy taxes on certain dangerous products that it is not profitable for companies to make and sell them. Second, Congress may use taxes to influence states to adopt certain kinds of programs. Federal law Congressional Desegregation Civil Rights In 1940, many businesses discriminated against African Americans. Bureau of the Census. Critical Thinking local governments in the United States decreased by 38,487. The first is by providing money through various federal grants. In 1862, for instance, Congress passed a law giving nearly 6 million acres of public land to the states for support of colleges. For example, federal money might go to a city to help improve airport runways or to a state for building new roads. Federal grants redistribute income among the states. In this way, federal grants have often worked to help reduce inequalities between wealthy and less wealthy states. States and local offices have learned that along with more federal aid comes federal control and red tape. This is because many federal aid programs provide money only if the state and local authorities are willing to meet conditions set by Congress. For example, Congress passed the Nutritional Labeling and Education Act in 1990 to establish national food labeling standards. This law took away the power of individual states to set their own requirements, even if those requirements were more strict than the new national standards. Preemption laws limit the authority of state and local governments through restraints and mandates. 1.00 or more of federal spending returned 99 or less of federal spending returned District of Columbia Source Tax Foundation, Washington, D.C. Federal revenue received from the states is not returned equally to the states. Advocates of states rights dislike the use of preemption because these laws may prevent the enforcement of a state or local law. Finally, preemption laws do not require Congress to pay for new mandates. Congress can therefore establish new programs and regulations and pass the burden of paying for them to the states. The balance of power in the federal system has shifted from time to time. Presidents Ronald Reagan and George H.W. Bush put in place several policies that turned the responsibility for many federal programs over to state and local governments. The total amount of federal aid given to the states declined as well. The relationship between federal and state governments is dynamic and is affected by the policies of the president and of Congress. The Americans With Disabilities Act, for example, required state and local governments to build ramps .
