S e c t i on 3 S e c t i on 3 Developing Federalism Readers Guide Key Terms states rights position, nationalist position, income tax Find Out Compare the view of the federal government as seen by a states rightist and a nationalist. Earlier, the group had asked Congress to give states the right to collect sales taxes on Internet commerce based on the tax rates of customers home states. To gain the governors support, the bills authors agreed to reduce the length of the delay from six to three years. While they deeply believed that the United States needed a strong central government to survive, they also knew that many people feared the centralization of power. The colonial experience with the power of British government was still fresh in peoples minds. This fully corresponds with the idea of a federal government. States Rightists Versus Nationalists Throughout American history, there have been two quite different views of how federalism should operate. The States Rights Position The states rights view holds that the Constitution is a com pact among the states. States rightists argue that the states created the national government and gave it only certain limited powers. Any doubt about whether a power belongs to the nation al government or is reserved to the states should be settled in favor of the states. Because the national government is an agent of the states, all of its powers should be narrowly defined. At various points in United States history, the Supreme Court has accepted this view. Under Chief Justice Roger B. Taney (18361864), the Court often supported states rights against powers of the national government. Maryland. The Nationalist Position The nationalist position rejects the idea of the Constitution as merely a compact among the states. Nationalists deny that the national government is an agent of the states. They hold that the necessary and proper clause of the Constitution means that Congress has the right to adopt any means that are convenient and useful to carry out its delegated powers. They also claim that the reserved powers of the states should not limit how the national government can use its own powers. They are U.S. In the past 30 years, public support for statehood has increased on the island. They look to the national government to take the lead in solving major social and economic problems facing the nation. The Supreme Court established the nationalist position in 1819 in McCulloch v. Maryland, but it re ally gained ground in the Court during the late 1930s. At that time, the Great Depression gripped the nation. Roosevelt responded by starting new social welfare and public works programs. It supported the expansion of the national governments powers in order to deal with the nations terrible economic problems. Growing National Government A major factor shaping the development of American federalism has been the growth in the size and power of the national government. War Powers The national government has power to wage war. Commerce Power The Constitution gives Congress the authority to regulate commerce. Supreme Court decisions have expanded this power. For example, Congress passed the Civil Rights Act of 1964 forbidding racial discrimination in public accommodations such as hotels and restaurants. Congress does, however, have authority to raise taxes and spend money for such purposes. The Sixteenth Amendment, ratified in 1913, gave Congress the power to tax incomes. It has given the national government much greater financial resources than any state or local government has. For example, Congress has put such heavy taxes on certain dangerous products that it is not profitable for companies to make and sell them. Second, Congress may use taxes to influence states to adopt certain kinds of programs. Federal law Congressional Desegregation Civil Rights In 1940, many businesses discriminated against African Americans. Bureau of the Census. Critical Thinking local governments in the United States decreased by 38,487. The first is by providing money through various federal grants. In 1862, for instance, Congress passed a law giving nearly 6 million acres of public land to the states for support of colleges. For example, federal money might go to a city to help improve airport runways or to a state for building new roads. Federal grants redistribute income among the states. In this way, federal grants have often worked to help reduce inequalities between wealthy and less wealthy states. States and local offices have learned that along with more federal aid comes federal control and red tape. This is because many federal aid programs provide money only if the state and local authorities are willing to meet conditions set by Congress. For example, Congress passed the Nutritional Labeling and Education Act in 1990 to establish national food labeling standards. This law took away the power of individual states to set their own requirements, even if those requirements were more strict than the new national standards. Preemption laws limit the authority of state and local governments through restraints and mandates. 1.00 or more of federal spending returned 99 or less of federal spending returned District of Columbia Source Tax Foundation, Washington, D.C. Federal revenue received from the states is not returned equally to the states. Advocates of states rights dislike the use of preemption because these laws may prevent the enforcement of a state or local law. Finally, preemption laws do not require Congress to pay for new mandates. Congress can therefore establish new programs and regulations and pass the burden of paying for them to the states. The balance of power in the federal system has shifted from time to time. Presidents Ronald Reagan and George H.W. Bush put in place several policies that turned the responsibility for many federal programs over to state and local governments. The total amount of federal aid given to the states declined as well. The relationship between federal and state governments is dynamic and is affected by the policies of the president and of Congress. The Americans With Disabilities Act, for example, required state and local governments to build ramps Section 3 Assessment Section 3 Assessment Checking for Understanding 1. Main Idea Using a graphic organizer like the one below, identify three constitutional provisions that have been the basis for the tremendous growth of the national government. National Government 2. Define states rights position, nationalist position, income tax. 3. Identify Chief Justice Roger B. Taney, Civil Rights Act of 1964, New Federalism. 4. Federalism Write an opinion paper stating your position on the following question Should the national government distribute money to states today with no strings attached, or should the money be directed toward specific programs Explain your position. State of New Jersey, 1978 Americans take for granted the right to unrestricted travel from one state to another. If we make a purchase outside our home state, we know we can transport it home without paying a duty or fee. Are there any limits to traffic among the states The case of City of Philadelphia v. State of New Jersey addressed this question. As the available sites for landfills continue to shrink, some metropolitan areas such as Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, have had to ship their wastes across state lines. The state legislature believed that the treatment and disposal of wastes posed a threat to the quality of the environment in the state. The Supreme Court heard the case of City of Philadelphia v. State of New Jersey in 1978. In the United States, power is divided among the national government, the state governments, and the people. In the New Jersey case, the issue was whether liquid and solid wastes could be defined as interstate commerce according to the Constitution. Throughout United States history the Supreme Court has expanded the definition of interstate commerce. One early case occurred in 1824. The Court decided in Gibbons v. Ogden that travel by ship on the Hudson River between New York and New Jersey was interstate commerce. In the 1930s the Court upheld the Wagner Act, a law that extended the meaning of interstate commerce by allowing Congress to regulate business and labor relations. The Court also applied a broad definition of commerce to uphold the Civil Rights Act of 1964, considering the issue of commerce, specifically restaurants, along interstate highways. Debating the Case Debating the Case Questions to Consider 1. What caused new legislation to be passed in New Jersey in 1973 2. Why do waste haulers consider their shipments a form of commerce 3. Although more than 20 states have passed laws limiting the service of state legislators, the reform now seems unlikely to reach Congress. Federalism and Public Policy A policy is a stated course of action. A high school principal says, It is our policy that students not park in the teachers parking lots. Federalism affects public policy making in two ways. Federalism permits states and localities to serve as proving grounds where new policies can be developed and tested. Georgia, for example, was the first state to allow 18yearolds to vote. In 1976 Colorado pioneered the use of sunset laws. Sun set laws require periodic checks of government agencies to see if they are still needed. In 1967 Florida passed a sunshine law prohibiting public officials from holding closed meetings. Policy may also originate at the national level. Sometimes the national government imposes new policies on states in which local pressure groups have resisted change. In the late 1950s and early 1960s, African Americans struggled to win voting and other civil rights in many states. Federalism and Political Parties Rival political parties are a key element of democratic government. In this way, federalism helps to lessen the risk of one political party gaining a monopoly on political powers. With such state and local bases, the party developed new policies and new leadership with which to challenge the majority party. The Democratic Party controlled the White House for only 5 of the 12 presidential terms between 1952 and 2000. Democratic organization at the state and local level, however, enabled the party to win a majority in Congress during most of that period. Making a Difference David Levitt was only a sixth Making a Difference David Levitt Points of Light medal grader when he decided to do something about the 30 million people in the United States who go to bed hungry every day. The principal pointed out that district health regulations prohibited using previously served food. But encouraged by his mother, David put a plan in motion. After the board gave its approval, he worked to satisfy state health department requirements. Davids efforts to help the people of his state did not stop with the distribution of food. Most importantly, Davids efforts have drawn attention to hunger and the availability of food in his community. Clinton what the White House did with its leftovers. They also vote on such local issues as whether to build a mass transit system in their city, whether to outlaw smoking in public places, or whether to increase property taxes for schools. Most people are more likely to become involved in political activities if they think there is a reasonable chance their efforts will bear fruit. The in creased chance for success encourages political participation. The road to nation al office often begins at the local or state level. American federalism gives citizens many points of access to government and increases their opportunities for influencing public policy. The great increase in federal programs beginning in the mid1930s called for a large bureaucracy, or organization of government administrators, to carry out legislation. As these bureaucrats gained expertise, they offered more and more ideas. Political writer Samuel H. Samuel H. The increase in federal programs also changed the political relationship of state and federal officials. C., to keep up with events and to stay in touch with law makers. In time these officials acquired political influence. As a result, some states do more than others to regulate business and industry, while some provide more health and welfare services. Because states can create different economic and political environments, Americans have a wide range of choices regarding the conditions under which they want to live, depending upon which state they live in. Bureau of the Census, 2002. Critical Thinking The total number of government employees decreased by nearly a million people in the late 1990s. Donald F. For example, Congress has given states greater control over spending for rural development, allowed states to set their own highway speed limits, and transferred responsibility for social welfare pro grams. At the same time, Congress has established .
