Section 4). In addition, the states play a key role in the process of amending the Constitution. The Courts as Umpire Because federalism divides the powers of government, conflicts frequently arise be tween national and state governments. In 1819, in the landmark case of McCulloch v. Maryland,1 the Supreme Court ruled on a conflict between a state government and the national government. The Courts view of this division has shifted through the years depending on the mood of the nation and on the number of conservative and liberal justices on the Court. Early in its history, the Court usually favored states power. During the Depression and the civil rights movement, the Court tended to favor a strong national government. Since the 1990s, a narrow majority of conservative justices has again generally ruled in favor of the states. For example, in United States v. Lopez (1995), the Court held that Congress had exceeded its authority over the states by passing a law banning gun possession in or near schools. Federal judges also serve as umpires of federal ism when they review the actions of state and local governments. In recent decades the power of federal judges has increased because of modern interpretations of the Fourteenth Amendment, which prohibits states from depriving any person of life, liberty, or property without due process of law. Broad interpretation of these words makes nearly every action by state and local officials open to questioning by a federal judge. See the following footnoted materials in the Reference Handbook 1. McCulloch v. Maryland case summary, page 761. Section 1 Assessment Section 1 Assessment Checking for Understanding 1. Main Idea Using a graphic organizer like the one at the right, give an example of each kind of power granted to the national government. Define delegated powers, expressed powers, Critical Thinking 5. Making Comparisons How do the obligations of the national government to states compare to obligations of states to the national government implied powers, elastic clause, inherent powers, reserved powers, supremacy clause, concurrent powers, enabling act. 3. Identify necessary and proper clause, McCulloch v. Maryland. 4. What kinds of powers may states exercise Federalism New states coming into the Union have had to follow a process established by Congress. Beginning with the enabling act passed by Congress, create a flow chart that shows the dates and conditions by which your state was admitted to the Union. Originally Brown had been serving a 5year sentence for robbery in Florida. When he was caught, Florida officials at first wanted Brown returned to serve his remaining sentence. Conflicts and jealousies among the states had been a major reason for drafting the Constitution in 1787. Because each state retains much power and independence, these rules help to assure cooperation among the states. Full Faith and Credit The Constitution states that full faith and credit shall be given in each state to the public acts, records, and judicial proceedings of every other state. For example, a car registration of one state must be accepted by all the other states. One state can not enforce another states criminal laws. The need for this kind of rule in the federal system is obvious. Without it, each state could treat all other states like foreign countries. The coverage of the full faith and credit rule is quite broad. Included, however, are rights to pass through or live in any state use the courts make contracts buy, sell, and hold property and marry. On the other hand, states may make reasonable discrimination against non residents. Some states require that a person live in a state for a certain amount of time before becoming a voter or public official. Records means such documents as mortgages, deeds, leases, wills, marriage licenses, car registrations, and birth certificates. The phrase judicial proceedings refers to various court actions such as judgments to pay a debt. Judicial decisions in civil matters in one state will be honored and enforced in all states. If, for ex ample, a person in Texas loses a lawsuit requiring a specific payment, and moves to Illinois to avoid paying the money, Illinois courts will enforce the Texas decision. A citizen of Delaware, for example, might be treated as an alien in Virginia or Maryland. Article IV, Section 2 This clause provides for the extradition of fugitives. Congress has made the governor of the state to which fugitives have fled responsible for re turning them. Although extradition is routine in the vast majority of cases, occasionally a governor will refuse. For example, a Michigan governor once re fused to return a fugitive to Arkansas because, the governor said, prison conditions in Arkansas were inhumane. Arkansas officials could do nothing about the governors decision. Interstate Compacts The Constitution re quires the states to settle their differences with one another without the use of force. Such compacts are written agreements between two or more states. Congress must approve interstate compacts. This requirement prevents states from threatening the Union by making alliances among themselves. Once a compact has been signed and approved by Congress, it is binding on all states signing it. Its terms are enforceable by the Supreme Court. Before 1900, only 13 interstate compacts had received congressional approval. Most of them involved boundary disputes between states. Today nearly 200 compacts are in force. States use compacts to deal with such matters as air and water pollution, pest control, toll bridges, and transportation. Many compacts today deal with the development and conservation of natural resources. Others deal with the transport and disposal of hazardous waste materials. Lawsuits Between States Sometimes states are unable to resolve their disputes by these or other methods. When this happens, an interstate lawsuit may result. Suits among two or more states are heard in the United States Supreme Court, the only court in which one state may sue another. States bring one another to court for a variety of reasons. Cases in the West often involve water rights. Arizona, California, and Colorado have gone to the Court in disputes over water from the Colorado River. Other cases have involved sewage from one state polluting the water in another state. Arkansas and Tennessee had such a dispute as recently as 1970. Section 2 Assessment Section 2 Assessment Checking for Understanding 1. Main Idea In a chart, list three ways states treat nonresidents differently and the same as residents. Treated the same Treated differently 1. 2. 3. 2. Define extradite, civil law, interstate compact. 3. 4. What three constitutional provisions are aimed at promoting cooperation among the states Critical Thinking 5. Find out if and how a drivers license, automobile registration, and voting registration are changed. Write a report on your findings. Earlier, the group had asked Congress to give states the right to collect sales taxes on Internet commerce based on the tax rates of customers home states. To gain the governors support, the bills authors agreed to reduce the length of the delay from six to three years. While they deeply believed that the United States needed a strong central government to survive, they also knew that many people feared the centralization of power. The colonial experience with the power of British government was still fresh in peoples minds. This fully corresponds with the idea of a federal government. States Rightists Versus Nationalists Throughout American history, there have been two quite different views of how federalism should operate. The States Rights Position The states rights view holds that the Constitution is a com pact among the states. States rightists argue that the states created the national government and gave it only certain limited powers. Any doubt about whether a power belongs to the nation al government or is reserved to the states should be settled in favor of the states. Because the national government is an agent of the states, all of its powers should be narrowly defined. At various points in United States history, the Supreme Court has accepted this view. Under Chief Justice Roger B. Taney (18361864), the Court often supported states rights against powers of the national government. Maryland. The Nationalist Position The nationalist position rejects the idea of the Constitution as merely a compact among the states. Nationalists deny that the national government is an agent of the states. They hold that the necessary and proper clause of the Constitution means that Congress has the right to adopt any means that are convenient and useful to carry out its delegated powers. They also claim that the reserved powers of the states should not limit how the national government can use its own powers. They are U.S. In the past 30 years, public support for statehood has increased on the island. They look to the national government to take the lead in solving major social and economic problems facing the nation. The Supreme Court established the nationalist position in 1819 in McCulloch v. Maryland, but it re ally gained ground in the Court during the late 1930s. At that time, the Great Depression gripped the nation. Roosevelt responded by starting new social welfare and public works programs. It supported the expansion of the national governments powers in order to deal with the nations terrible economic problems. Growing National Government A major factor shaping the development of American federalism has been the growth in the size and power of the national government. War Powers The national government has power to wage war. Commerce Power The Constitution gives Congress the authority to regulate commerce. Supreme Court decisions have expanded this power. For example, Congress passed the Civil Rights Act of 1964 forbidding racial discrimination in public accommodations such as hotels and restaurants. Congress does, however, have authority to raise taxes and spend money for such purposes. The Sixteenth Amendment, ratified in 1913, gave Congress the power to tax incomes. It has given the national government much greater financial resources than any state or local government has. For example, Congress has put such heavy taxes on certain dangerous products that it is not profitable for companies to make and sell them. Second, Congress may use taxes to influence states to adopt certain kinds of programs. Federal law Congressional Desegregation Civil Rights In 1940, many businesses discriminated against African Americans. Bureau of the Census. Critical Thinking local governments in the United States decreased by 38,487. The first is by providing money through various federal grants. In 1862, for instance, Congress passed a law giving nearly 6 million acres of public land to the states for support of colleges. For example, federal money might go to a city to help improve airport runways or to a state for building new roads. Federal grants redistribute income among the states. In this way, federal grants have often worked to help reduce inequalities between wealthy and less wealthy states. States and local offices have learned that along with more federal aid comes federal control and red tape. This is because many federal aid programs provide money only if the state and local authorities are willing to meet conditions set by Congress. For example, Congress passed the Nutritional Labeling and Education Act in 1990 to establish national food labeling standards. This law took away the power of individual states to set their own requirements, even if those requirements were more strict than the new national standards. Preemption laws limit the authority of state and local governments through restraints and mandates. 1.00 or more of federal spending returned 99 or less of federal spending returned District of Columbia Source Tax Foundation, Washington, D.C. Federal revenue received from the states is not returned equally to the states. Advocates of states rights dislike the use of preemption because these laws may prevent the enforcement of a state or local law. Finally, preemption laws do not require Congress to pay for new mandates. Congress can therefore establish new programs and regulations and pass the burden of paying for them to the states. The balance of power in the federal system has shifted from time to time. Presidents Ronald Reagan and George H.W. Bush put in place several policies that turned the responsibility for many federal programs over to state and local governments. The total amount of federal aid given to the states declined as well. The relationship between federal and state governments is dynamic and is affected by the policies of the president and of Congress. The Americans With Disabilities Act, for example, required state and local governments to build ramps Section 3 Assessment Section 3 Assessment Checking for Understanding 1. Main Idea Using a graphic organizer like the one below, identify three constitutional provisions that have been the basis for the tremendous growth of the national government. National Government 2. Define states rights position, nationalist position, income tax. 3. Identify Chief Justice Roger B. Taney, Civil Rights Act of 1964, New Federalism. 4. Federalism Write an opinion paper stating your position on the following question Should the national government distribute money to states today with no strings attached, or should the money be directed toward specific programs Explain your position. State of New Jersey, 1978 Americans take for granted the right to unrestricted travel from one state to another. If we make a purchase outside our home state, we know we can transport it home without paying a duty or fee. Are there any limits to traffic among the states The case of City of Philadelphia v. State of New Jersey addressed this question. As the available sites for landfills continue to shrink, some metropolitan areas such as Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, have had to ship their wastes across state lines. The state legislature believed that the treatment and disposal of wastes posed a threat to the quality of the environment in the state. The Supreme Court heard the case of City of Philadelphia v. State of New Jersey in 1978. In the United States, power is divided among the national government, the state governments, and the people. In the New Jersey case, the issue was whether liquid and solid wastes could be defined as interstate commerce according to the Constitution. Throughout United States history the Supreme Court has expanded the definition of interstate commerce. One early case occurred in 1824. The Court decided in Gibbons v. Ogden that travel by ship on the Hudson River between New York and New Jersey was interstate commerce. In the 1930s the Court upheld the Wagner Act, a law that extended the meaning of interstate commerce by allowing Congress to regulate business and labor relations. The Court also applied a broad definition of commerce to uphold the Civil Rights Act of 1964, considering the issue of commerce, specifically restaurants, along interstate highways. Debating the Case Debating the Case Questions to Consider 1. What caused new legislation to be passed in New Jersey in 1973 2. Why do waste haulers consider their shipments a form of commerce 3. Although more than 20 states have passed laws limiting the service of state legislators, the reform now seems unlikely to reach Congress. Federalism and Public Policy A policy is a stated course of action. A high school principal says, It is our policy that students not park in the teachers parking lots. Federalism affects public policy making in two ways. Federalism permits states and localities to serve as proving grounds where new policies can be developed and tested. Georgia, for example, was the first state to allow 18yearolds to vote. In 1976 Colorado pioneered the use of sunset laws. Sun set laws require periodic checks of government agencies to see if they are still needed. In 1967 Florida passed a sunshine law prohibiting public officials from holding closed meetings. Policy may also originate at the national level. Sometimes the national government imposes new policies on states in which local pressure groups have resisted change. In the late 1950s and early 1960s, African Americans struggled to win voting and other civil rights in many states. Federalism and Political Parties Rival political parties are a key element of democratic government. In this way, federalism helps to lessen the risk of one political party gaining a monopoly on political powers. With such state and local bases, the party developed new policies and new leadership with which to challenge the majority party. The Democratic Party controlled the White House for only 5 of the 12 presidential terms between 1952 and 2000. Democratic organization at the state and local level, however, enabled the party to win a majority in Congress during most of that period. Making a Difference David Levitt was only a sixth Making a Difference David Levitt Points of Light medal grader when he decided to do something about the 30 million people in the United States who go to bed hungry every day. The principal pointed out that district health regulations prohibited using previously served food. But encouraged by his mother, David put a plan in motion. After the board gave its approval, he worked to satisfy state health department requirements. Davids efforts to help the people of his state did not stop with the distribution of food. Most importantly, Davids efforts have drawn attention to hunger and the availability of food in his community. Clinton what the White House did with its leftovers. They also vote on such local issues as whether to build a mass transit system in their city, whether to outlaw smoking in public places, or whether to increase property taxes for schools. Most people are more likely to become involved in political activities if they think there is a reasonable chance their efforts will bear fruit. The in creased chance for success encourages political participation. The road to nation al office often begins at the local or state level. American federalism gives citizens many points of access to government and increases their opportunities for influencing public policy. The great increase in federal programs beginning in the mid1930s called for a large bureaucracy, or organization of government administrators, to carry out legislation. As these bureaucrats gained expertise, they offered more and more ideas. Political writer Samuel H. Samuel H. The increase in federal programs also changed the political relationship of state and federal officials. C., to keep up with events and to stay in touch with law makers. In time these officials acquired political influence. As a result, some states do more than others to regulate business and industry, while some provide more health and welfare services. Because states can create different economic and political environments, Americans have a wide range of choices regarding the conditions under which they want to live, depending upon which state they live in. Bureau of the Census, 2002. Critical Thinking The total number of government employees decreased by nearly a million people in the late 1990s. Donald F. For example, Congress has given states greater control over spending for rural development, allowed states to set their own highway speed limits, and transferred responsibility for social welfare pro grams. At the same time, Congress has established Section 4 Assessment Section 4 Assessment Checking for Understanding 1. Main Idea Using a graphic organizer like the one to the right, show two ways that federalism influences public policy making. Federalism 2. Define sunset law, sunshine law, bureaucracy. 3. Identify public policy. 4. How did African Americans use national attention to change policy in state and local governments in the 1950s and 1960s 5. Making Inferences How does federalism allow for political and economic diversity among the states Public Policy Federalism allows people to have easier access to political office and greater opportunities for influencing public policy. Find out the political offices that a person living in your community can vote for on the state and local levels. Illustrate your findings in a poster display. They include letters, diaries, photographs, news articles, and legal documents. Primary sources yield several important kinds of information. Often they give detailed accounts of events. However, the account reflects only one perspective. For this reason, you must examine as many perspectives as possible before drawing any conclusions. In accordance with that responsibility, I have today issued an Executive Order directing the use of troops under Federal authority to aid in the execution of Federal law at Little Rock, Arkansas . It was my hope that this localized situation would be brought under control by city and State authorities. If the use of local police powers had been sufficient, our traditional method of leaving the problems in those hands would have been pursued. But when large gatherings of obstructionists made it impossible for the decrees of the Court to be carried out, both the law and the national interest demanded that the President take action. 1. What event does the document address 3. Bring this source to class and explain what it shows about that time in your life. 117 Learning the Skill written. To analyze primary sources, follow these steps Identify the author of the source. Identify when and where the document was Read the document for its content and try to answer the five W questions Who is it about What is it about When did it happen Where did it happen Why did it happen Determine what kind of information may be missing from the primary source. Practicing the Skill The primary source that follows is part of an address given by President Eisenhower. Read the source, and then answer the questions. Reviewing Key Terms On a sheet of paper write the headings National Government and State Government. Group the terms below under the appropriate heading. 1. Name the clause of the Constitution that resolves conflicts between state law and national law. 2. Describe how Congress gained power to regulate farm production, child labor, wages and hours, and criminal conduct. 3. What is the major source of income for the national government 4. How does the federalist system affect political participation 5. Federalism Why does the Tenth Amendment use the term reserved to describe the powers that belong to the people and the states 2. Why do these bureaucrats have great influence on legislation and decision making Critical Thinking 1. Concepts of Federalism Roosevelt Reagan 2. Identifying Assumptions Federalism helps lessen the risk of one political party gaining a monopoly on political powers. Read the excerpt from his speech, and answer the questions that follow. They want to be bossed around by state bureaucrats. 1. How does this cartoon demonstrate the states rights position The Great Society rests on abundance and liberty for all. It demands an end to poverty and racial injustice, to which we are totally committed in our time. But that is just the beginning . The catalog of ills is long there is the decay of the centers and the despoiling of the suburbs. There is not enough housing for our people or transportation for our traffic. Open land is vanishing and old landmarks are violated . But I do promise this We are going to assemble the best thought and the broadest knowledge from all over the world to find those answers for America. And from these meetings we will begin to set our course toward the Great Society. 1. Do you believe Johnson was acting within his power to enact a program like the Great Society Explain. How are the American people bossed around by federal 3. Is the speaker probably a state or federal official Why are being considered in the current congressional term. Participating in Local Government Congress has the power to add new states to the Union. Use research materials from your school or local library and present your findings in an illustrated report. Create a time line that includes important governmental developments.
