Pressured by constituents, senators decided to hand over a few perks. National Airport, however R The United States Capitol he Founders did not intend to make Congress a privileged group, but they did intend that the legislative branch have more power than any other branch of government. The Constitution emphasized the importance of the lawmaking branch by describing Congress in Article I. As James Madison said, Congress is the First Branch of this Government. The United States Congress is a bicameral legislature, meaning that it is made up of two houses, in this case, the Senate and the House of Representatives. Most of the delegates to the Constitutional Convention agreed to a bicameral legislature. Today Congress plays a central role in formulating national policies. Congress initiates and approves laws dealing with everything from health care to tax changes. For example, the 107th Congress began its term in January 2001 and the 108th Congress began in January 2003. Each term of Congress is divided into two sessions, or meetings. A session lasts one year and includes breaks for holidays and vacations. This time delay was shortened when the session start date was moved to January. Congress remains in session until its members vote to adjourn. Neither the House nor the Senate may adjourn for more than three days without the approval of the other house. Also, if Congress is adjourned, the president may call it back for a special session if necessary. The speaker sits in the center, between the two parties. Present British procedures influenced the U.S. House of Representatives. Each major political party sits on one side of the chamber, while the Speaker occupies a platform in the front and center. Political Processes How does the physical division into political groups help the Speaker of the House to moderate debates Membership of the House With its 435 members, the House of Representatives is the larger body of Congress. The Constitution does not set the number of representatives in the House. It simply states that the number of House seats must be apportioned, or divided, among the states on the basis of population. Each state is entitled to at least one seat in the House, no matter how small its population. Qualifications The Constitution sets the qualifications for election to the House of Representatives. Representatives must be at least 25 years old, be citizens of the United States for at least 7 years, and be legal residents of the state that elects them. Traditionally, representatives also live in the district they represent. This means that every two years, all 435 members of the House must run for reelection. It also means that the House reorganizes itself every two years. Because more than 90 percent of all representatives are reelected, however, there is great continuity in the House. If a representative dies or resigns in the first session of Congress, the state must hold a special election to fill that vacancy. Procedures for vacancies that occur during the second session vary from state to state. Representation and Reapportionment In order to assign representation according to population, the Census Bureau takes a national census, or population count, every 10 years. The first census was taken in 1790, and each state was apportioned its representatives. The next census will be in 2010. Originally the House had only 64 members. Over the years, as the population of the nation grew, the number of representatives increased. By 1911 the House had 435 members. After the debate sparked by the 1920 census, and concern about the increasing size of the House, Congress passed the Reapportionment Act of 1929 limiting the House to 435 representatives. Now each census determines how those 435 seats will be divided among the 50 states. Representatives are elected from these congressional districts. If a state is entitled to only one representative, it has one congressional district. In most states the state legislature draws the boundary lines for each congressional election district. The process of setting up new district lines after reapportionment has been completed is called redistricting. Over the years some state legislatures abused the redistricting power. They did so in two ways by creating congressional districts of very unequal populations and by gerrymandering. During the early 1960s, for example, there were some states in which the largest district in the state had twice the population of the smallest district. In these states a persons vote in the largest congressional districts had only half the value of a persons vote in the smallest districts. Congressional Apportionment, 2000 WA 9 OR 5 MT 1 ID 2 ND 1 MN 8 WY 1 IA 5 NE 3 NV 31 UT 3 CA 531 CO 71 AZ 82 WI 81 SD 1 KS 4 OK 51 NM 3 IN IL 191 91 MO 9 TX 322 OH 181 KY 6 WV 3 TN 9 AR 4 MS 42 AK 1 MI 151 AL 7 GA 132 ME 2 VT 1 NH MA 10 2 NY RI 292 2 CT PA 51 192 NJ 13 VA 11 NC 131 DE 1 MD 8 SC 6 LA 7 FL 252 HI 2 States gaining seats 234 States losing seats States with no change Indicates number of House seats Denotes gain or loss of seats Source U.S. Census Bureau, 2001 Critical Thinking This apportionment map is based on the 2000 census. It will be adjusted after the census of 2010. In a case originating in Tennessee, Baker v. Carr 1 (1962), the Court held that federal courts could decide conflicts over drawing district boundaries. Two years later, in Reynolds v. Sims 2, the Court held that the equal protection clause of the Fourteenth Amendment required that seats in both houses of the Alabama state legislature be apportioned on a population basis. Sanders 3 (Georgia, 1964), the Court ruled that the Constitution clearly intended that a vote in one congressional district was to be worth as much as a vote in another district. As a result, today each congressional district contains about 650,000 people. See the following footnoted materials in the Reference Handbook 1. Baker v. Carr case summary, page 754. 2. Reynolds v. Sims case summary, page 764. 3. Sanders case summary, page 767. This approach increased the number of minority representatives, but it also tended to concentrate the Democratic vote, leaving neighboring districts more Republican. North Carolina redrew its legislative districts in 1997. Gerrymandering Historically, state legislatures have abused their power to divide the state into congressional districts by gerrymandering. Gerrymandering means that the political party controlling the state government draws a districts boundaries to gain an advantage in elections. Gerrymandering often results in district boundaries that have very irregular shapes. Gerry had signed a redistricting plan that gave his party a big political advantage over the Federalists. To a map of one particularly irregular district that looked like a salamander, artist Gilbert Stuart added a head, wings, and claws. A newspaper editor published the map as a cartoon and labeled it a Gerrymander. Federalists popularized the term. Packing and cracking are ways to gerrymander. The Supreme Court has ruled that congressional districts must be compact and contiguous, or physically adjoining. Many districts today are still drawn in irregular shapes for political reasons. Swings in Control of Congress Political Division of the Senate to 1967 Political Division of the House to 1967 132 333 188 295 300 1 192123 89 13 193739 246 1 194749 140 196567 Republicans led Congress in the 1920s until the Great Depression. Except for the late 1940s, Democrats then controlled Congress until the late 1980s. 59 75 45 17 4 51 68 32 Political Division of the Senate Since 1987 Political Division of the House Since 1987 258 37 177 198789 55 45 175 198991 55 45 167 1 199193 56 44 176 1 199395 57 43 231 1 199597 207 227 1 199799 45 55 211 223 1 199901 45 55 212 221 2 200103 50 49 1 229 1 200305 48 51 1 232 1 200507 260 267 258 203 205 202 48 44 52 55 1 These results are the results on Election Day, except for the 200103 Senate, in which party control changed soon after the election. Divisions of seats within a Congress can change after an election due to death, retirement, and party switching. Sources www.senate.gov www.house.gov. Democrats Republicans Independents Critical Thinking Democrats and Republicans have each had periods of dominance in the House and Senate. Thus, each state is represented equally. Qualifications The Constitution provides that senators must be at least 30 years old, citizens of the United States for 9 years before election, and legal residents of the state they represent. Senators also begin their terms on January 3, after the election held the previous November. In fact, the Senate has more continuity than the Framers planned because most senators win reelection. If a senator dies or resigns before the end of the term, the state legislature may authorize the governor to appoint someone to fill the vacancy until the next election. The governor may also call a special election to fill the seat. Salary and Benefits The Senate and the House set their own salaries. In 1789 salaries for both houses were 6 per day. Low pay in the early years deterred some people from running for Congress. Congress has voted itself periodic salary increases. Meanwhile, a constitutional amendment affecting legislative salaries was being considered. The amendment prohibits a sitting Congress from giving itself a pay raise. Any new congressional salary increase will take effect after an intervening election. (Automatic cost of living adjustments raised salaries to 150,000 in 2002.) A United States District Court judge had ruled that Automatic annual adjustments to congressional salaries meet both the language and the spirit of the 27th Amendment . These include stationery, postage for official business (called the franking privilege), a medical clinic, and a gymnasium. Members also receive large allowances to pay for their office staff and assistants, trips home, telephones, telegrams, and newsletters. All members are entitled to an income tax deduction to help maintain two residences, one in their home state and one in Washington, D.C. Moreover, when they retire, senators and representatives may be eligible for pensions of 150,000 or more a year for life. Privileges of Members The Constitution provides members of Congress certain protections while they carry out their legislative duties. They are free from arrest in all cases except treason, felony, and breach of the peace, when they are attending Congress or on their way to or from Congress. Members of Congress cannot be sued for anything they say on the House or Senate floor. This privilege does not extend to what members may say outside of Congress. In Hutchinson v. The Senate and the House both may judge members qualifications and decide whether to seat them. Each house may refuse to seat an elected member by a majority vote. This power of exclusion was later defined by the Supreme Court See the following footnoted materials in the Reference Handbook 1. The Constitution, pages 774799. 2. Hutchinson v. McCormack (see Supreme Court Cases to Debate on page 131). Only the most serious offenses such as treason or accepting bribes are grounds for expulsion. Members who are guilty of lesser offenses may be censured. Censure is a vote of formal disapproval of a members actions. However, they do attend sessions, introduce bills, speak in debates, and vote in committees. Characteristics Nearly half the members of Congress are lawyers. Why are there so many lawyers Because lawyers by profession deal with laws, it is logical for them to serve as legislators. Training in law helps a legislator understand the complex legal issues that may affect legislation. The average age of members of Congress is usually over 50. Slowly Congress has begun to reflect the racial, ethnic, and gender diversity of the general population. Critical Thinking Congress is changing slowly to reflect Americas diverse population. Between 1945 and 1990, about 90 percent of all incumbents, or those members already in office, won reelection. In some elections, many seats went unchallenged because opponents knew that they would have little or no chance of winning. Why have incumbents been so successful First, incumbents find it easier to raise campaign funds because they have worked with so many people while representing their district. Third, incumbents are better known to voters, who see them at rallies and on television and read about them in newspapers. Fourth, incumbents use their position to help solve voters problems. Finally, incumbents win because the majority of voters believe their incumbent best represents their views. Campaigning Online While television and radio remain the dominant campaign technologies, people running for Congress have begun using the Internet as a campaign tool. Challengers for open seats and incumbents in highly competitive races are making the greatest use of the Web. Nearly all candidates now have election Web sites that serve as electronic brochures providing biographies, press releases, lists of upcoming campaign events, and other information. Candidates also use their election Web sites to recruit volunteers and to raise campaign contributions. A few candidates have even used their Web sites to broadcast, in real time, campaign events such as speeches. Not many candidates, however, have taken advantage of the interactive capacities of the Internet. In recent elections, for instance, only one in ten candidates has conducted town hall type meetings with voters through their Web sites. Some experts predict more candidates will do so in the future. Experts also forecast that congressional candidates will make greater use of Web technologies such as search engines, portals, and email lists to identify voters in their districts interested in particular issues like gun control or health care. The Internet can then be used to communicate directly with such voters using specially targeted emails or Web sites. Finally, experts anticipate more candidates will start using the Internet to improve communications within their campaign organizations. Sect ion 1 Assessment Checking for Understanding Critical Thinking 1. Main Idea In a graphic organizer similar to the one below, compare the qualifications for representatives House Senate and senators. 2. 3. 4. How does Congress reapportion House seats among the states every ten years 5. Making Inferences Members of Congress spend part of their time working for reelection. Powell v. McCormack, 1969 The Constitution gives Congress the power to be the Judge of the Elections, Returns and Qualifications of its own Members. It establishes the age, citizenship, and residence requirements for the House and Senate. Does the Constitution allow Congress to judge qualifications beyond these three specific requirements The case of Powell v. McCormack addressed this question. However, a congressional investigation had already disclosed questionable activities by Powell and members of his staff during his previous terms. The House refused to seat Powell. In March 1967 Congress declared the seat vacant and notified the governor of New York to order a new election. Powell charged that he had been unlawfully excluded from his seat in the House and brought suit in the federal courts. Speaker John McCormack and four other officials were named as defendants. They responded that Congress had authority under the Constitution to judge the qualifications of its own members. The federal district court dismissed the complaint on the grounds that it did not have jurisdiction in this matter. The United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia refused to hear the case on the grounds that it was essentially a political question. The Supreme Court heard the case of Powell v. McCormack in 1969. The 90th Congress, to which Powell had been elected, was Adam Clayton Powell, Jr. In the meantime (1968) Powell had been elected again and seated in the 91st Congress. His lawyers now asked the Court for back salary for the two years he was denied his seat. Finally, defendants asked whether the Court could coerce officers of the House or issue injunctions compelling officers or employees of the House to perform specific acts. The Supreme Court referred to debates at the Constitutional Convention that related to giving Congress power to judge its members qualifications. Debating the Case Questions to Consider 1. Connecticut attacked M a Lyon of Vermont with d de cane. Mr. Mr. Legislators must have freedom to express their sometimes inflammatory opinions. Rules are necessary to help ensure fairness, to enable the legislature to conduct business, and to protect the minority. Article I, Section 5 1, of the Constitution says Each House may determine the Rules of its Proceedings. Thomas Jefferson compiled the first parliamentary manual for the Senate when he was vice president. He emphasized the importance of rules P It is much more material that there be a rule to go by, than what the rule is that there may be a uniformity of proceeding in business not subject to the caprice whims of the Speaker or captiousness criticisms of the members. Because the House and Senate differ in many ways, each house has organized itself to carry out its work of making the laws. Complex rules and a structure of leadership enable Congress to carry out its lawmaking duties. Complex Rules Each chamber has scores of precedents based on past rulings that serve as a guide to conducting business. The House and Senate each print their rules every two years. See the following footnoted materials in the Reference Handbook 1. The Constitution, pages 774799. The complex rules in the House are geared toward moving legislation quickly once it reaches the floor. House debates rarely last more than one day. Moreover, leaders of the House of Representatives have more power than leaders in the Senate. For example, the rules of the House allow its leaders to make key decisions about legislative work without consulting other House members. He emphasizes the importance of libraries in promoting literacy. As an African American, Owens also supports funding for African American colleges and aid for underprivileged students. He explains Committee Work Committees do most of the work of Congress. In the House, committee work is more important than in the Senate. Because the membership of the House is so large, its members must organize themselves into smaller groups in order to accomplish their work efficiently. In the committees representatives have more influence than on the House floor, and they have the time to study and shape bills. For example, Major R. Owens, a representative from Brooklyn, New York, is the only trained Making a Difference Vernon Baker Medal of Honor We need more role models who will open new possibilities for those who have been excluded from the dreams that others take for granted. Major R. Owens Finally, because House members are elected from districts, much of their time is devoted to serving the interests of their constituents. John J. Duncan, Jr., of Tennessee said I have a firm belief we have too many laws on the books now . John J. Duncan, Jr., 1988 n 1944 Vernon Baker, a 25yearold army second lieutenant serving in World War II, was shot in the wrist by a German sniper. He spent two months in a segregated hospital, then returned to lead his men into battle. On the morning of April 5, 1945, Baker destroyed two enemy bunkers, an observation post, and three machine gun nests. His company was nearly wiped out, but he ordered the seven remaining men to retreat while he drew enemy fire. Somehow, amid exploding shells, Lieutenant Baker escaped. Although the army segregated African Americans during the war, Baker and his men fought like heroes. Presented with the Distinguished Service Cross for his service in Italy, Baker remained in the military after the war. When he retired from the army in 1968, he took a job with the Red Cross, counseling needy military families. In 1990 Army officials reexamined their records, looking for congressional Medal of Honor candidates among African Americans with outstanding service in World War II. Fifty years after his act of bravery, Vernon Baker accepted the medal in a White House ceremony. Franking cannot be used for personal business or for political campaigns. It can be used only on letters mailed to constituents. Importance of Party Affiliation Many procedures in Congress are organized around the political party affiliation of members. In both the House and Senate, the Republicans sit on the right side of the chamber, the Democrats on the left. In each house the majority party selects the leaders of that body, controls the flow of legislative work, and appoints committee chairs. The power to organize the House explains why some conservative Democrats switched to the Republican Party when it became the majority party in Congress after the 1994 election. The Republican majority began sweeping changes of House rules in 1995, promoted to make the House more accountable. The new rules provided for fewer committees, fewer staff members, term limits for chairpersons and the Speaker, and an end to absentee voting in committees. Despite strong resistance from the Democratic leaders in the House, the new Republican majority was able to push through the reforms. House Leadership Organized leadership coordinates the work of the 435 individual members of the House of Representatives. The Constitution provides only for the presiding officer of the House. Other than that, the House chooses all its other leaders. The Speaker of the House The Speaker of the House is the presiding officer of the House and its most powerful leader. The Constitution states that the House shall choose their Speaker and other officers. A caucus, or closed meeting, of the majority party chooses the House Speaker at the start of each session of Congress, and the entire House membership approves the choice of Speaker. As both the presiding officer of the House and the leader of the majority party, the Speaker has great power. Presiding over the sessions of the House, the Speaker can influence proceedings by deciding which members to recognize first. The Speaker also appoints the members of some committees, schedules bills for action, and refers bills to the proper House committee. Finally, the Speaker of the House follows the vice president in the line of succession to the presidency. Today, Speakers rely as much on persuasion as on their formal powers to exercise influence. On a typical day, the Speaker may talk with dozens of fellow members of Congress. Often the Speaker does so just to listen to requests for a favor. In return, the Speaker expects representatives support on important issues. House Floor Leaders The Speakers top assistant is the majority leader. The majority leader is the floor leader of his or her political party in the House and, like the Speaker, is elected by the majority party. Thus, the majority leader is not actually a House official but a party official. The majority leader has help from the majority whip and deputy whips. These whips serve as assistant floor leaders in the House. The minority party in the House also elects its own leaders. These include the minority leader and the minority whips. Lawmaking in the House To a visitor, the floor of the House of Representatives may seem totally disorganized. Some representatives talk in small groups or read newspapers. Others constantly walk in and out of the chamber. Most representatives are not even on the floor, because they are in committee meetings, talking with voters, or taking care of other business. Representatives reach the floor quickly, however, when it is time for debate or a vote on proposed bills. Usually, the House starts its floor sessions at noon or earlier. Buzzers ring in members offices in the House office buildings, committee rooms, and in the Capitol, calling representatives. The House is normally in session from Monday through Friday. Mondays are for routine work. Not much is done on Friday because many representatives leave to go to their home districts over the weekend. Thus, most of the Houses important work is done from Tuesday through Thursday. How House Bills Are Scheduled All laws start as bills. 6 yrs. 6 yrs. 4 yrs. 6 yrs. Number varies. Normal attendance is 300, but many more vote on key decisions. Critical Thinking Culture and history play large roles in how legislatures are formed around the world. How to raise the question of consideration and how to vote 6. Rules of order had their origin in early British Parliaments. Many groups use Roberts Rules of Order, first published in 1876 by U.S. Robert. Roberts Rules addresses such issues as 1. How to make a motion and how to amend a motion 2. What rank or precedence various kinds of motions have 3. How to table or suspend a motion L president signs it. According to the procedure currently in place, to introduce a bill in the House, representatives drop it into the hopper, a mahogany box that is accessible to all near the front of the chamber. After a bill is introduced, the Speaker of the House sends it to the appropriate committee for study, discussion, and review. Of the thousands of bills and resolutions introduced during each legislative term of Congress, only about 10 to 20 percent ever go to the full House for a vote. Bills that survive the committee process are put on one of the House calendars. Calendars list bills that are up for consideration. The House has five calendars. Three are used to schedule different kinds of bills for consideration. The Union Calendar lists bills dealing with money issues. Most other public bills are put on the House Calendar. The Private Calendar lists bills that deal with individual people or places. Any bill that the House gives unanimous consent to debate out of regular order is listed on the Consent Calendar. Finally, the Discharge Calendar is used for petitions to discharge a bill from committee. Obtain a copy of Roberts Rules of Order. Appoint a small group to find rules pertaining to the items listed above. Discuss the needs of a small group meeting (about the size of your class). Write rules for such a meeting based on these needs. 2. Choose a presiding officer for a meeting of your government class and a parliamentarian to enforce the rules. Hold a meeting in which the class determines an issue to discuss, hears opinions from the floor, and decides whether to take any action. The House Rules Committee The Rules Committee serves as the traffic officer in the House, helping to direct the flow of major legislation. It is one of the oldest House committees, and the most powerful. After a committee has considered and approved a major bill, it usually goes to the Rules Committee. The Rules Committee can move bills ahead quickly, hold them back, or stop them completely. Because the Rules Committee has the power to decide how and when legislation will be considered by the House, it has often been the focus of political battles. From 1858 to 1910, the Speaker of the House, as chair of the Rules Committee, dominated the flow of legislation. In 1911 the House revolted against Speaker Joseph G. Cannons authoritarian leadership and removed him from the Rules Committee. In 1975 Democratic majorities in the House once again placed the Rules Committee under control of the Speaker. A former Speaker explained The Rules Committee is an agent of the leadership. It is what distinguishes us from the Senate, where the rules deliberately favor those who would delay. The rules of the House permit a majority to work its will on legislation rather than allow it to be bottled up and stymied. Speaker Jim Wright, 1987 ahead. The Rules Committee may also include a time limit for debate on the bill and specify how much the bill may be amended on the floor. Other Purposes of the Rules Committee Republicans became the majority party in the House of Representatives in 1995. Their new Speaker, Newt Gingrich, as minority leader in the previous Congress had sparked an ethics investigation that resulted in Speaker Jim Wrights resignation. Gingrich asserted the power to appoint committee chairpersons, including the leader of the powerful Rules Committee. The Rules Committee also settles disputes among other House committees. For example, the Armed Services Committee may be considering a bill that involves an area also covered by the Veterans Affairs Committee. The Rules Committee can help resolve any dispute between the two committees. Finally, the Rules Committee often delays or blocks bills that representatives and House leaders do not want to come to a vote on the floor. In this way the Rules Committee draws criticism away from members who might have to take an unpopular stand on a bill if it reaches the floor. As major bills come out of committee, they are entered on either the Union Calendar or the House Calendar in the order received. The calendars have so many bills that if they were taken up in that order, many would never reach the floor before the end of the session. To resolve this problem, the chairperson of the committee that sent the bill to the Rules Committee may ask for it to move ahead of other bills and to be sent to the House floor. If the Rules Committee grants the request, the bill moves A quorum is the minimum number of members who must be present to permit a legislative body to take official action. For a regular session, a quorum consists of the majority of the House218 members. When the House meets to debate and amend legislation it may often sit as a Committee of the Whole. In that case, only 100 members constitute a quorum. This procedure helps speed the consideration of important bills. The Committee of the Whole cannot pass a bill. Instead, it reports the measure back to the full House with whatever changes it has made. The House then has the authority to pass or reject the bill.
