Connecticut attacked M a Lyon of Vermont with d de cane. Mr. Mr. Legislators must have freedom to express their sometimes inflammatory opinions. Rules are necessary to help ensure fairness, to enable the legislature to conduct business, and to protect the minority. Each House may determine the Rules of its Proceedings. Thomas Jefferson compiled the first parliamentary manual for the Senate when he was vice president. He emphasized the importance of rules P It is much more material that there be a rule to go by, than what the rule is that there may be a uniformity of proceeding in business not subject to the caprice whims of the Speaker or captiousness criticisms of the members. Because the House and Senate differ in many ways, each house has organized itself to carry out its work of making the laws. Complex rules and a structure of leadership enable Congress to carry out its lawmaking duties. Complex Rules Each chamber has scores of precedents based on past rulings that serve as a guide to conducting business. The House and Senate each print their rules every two years. See the following footnoted materials in the Reference Handbook 1. The Constitution, pages 774799. The complex rules in the House are geared toward moving legislation quickly once it reaches the floor. House debates rarely last more than one day. Moreover, leaders of the House of Representatives have more power than leaders in the Senate. For example, the rules of the House allow its leaders to make key decisions about legislative work without consulting other House members. He emphasizes the importance of libraries in promoting literacy. As an African American, Owens also supports funding for African American colleges and aid for underprivileged students. He explains Committee Work Committees do most of the work of Congress. In the House, committee work is more important than in the Senate. Because the membership of the House is so large, its members must organize themselves into smaller groups in order to accomplish their work efficiently. In the committees representatives have more influence than on the House floor, and they have the time to study and shape bills. For example, Major R. Owens, a representative from Brooklyn, New York, is the only trained Making a Difference Vernon Baker Medal of Honor We need more role models who will open new possibilities for those who have been excluded from the dreams that others take for granted. Major R. Owens Finally, because House members are elected from districts, much of their time is devoted to serving the interests of their constituents. John J. Duncan, Jr., of Tennessee said I have a firm belief we have too many laws on the books now . John J. Duncan, Jr., 1988 n 1944 Vernon Baker, a 25yearold army second lieutenant serving in World War II, was shot in the wrist by a German sniper. He spent two months in a segregated hospital, then returned to lead his men into battle. On the morning of April 5, 1945, Baker destroyed two enemy bunkers, an observation post, and three machine gun nests. His company was nearly wiped out, but he ordered the seven remaining men to retreat while he drew enemy fire. Somehow, amid exploding shells, Lieutenant Baker escaped. Although the army segregated African Americans during the war, Baker and his men fought like heroes. Presented with the Distinguished Service Cross for his service in Italy, Baker remained in the military after the war. When he retired from the army in 1968, he took a job with the Red Cross, counseling needy military families. In 1990 Army officials reexamined their records, looking for congressional Medal of Honor candidates among African Americans with outstanding service in World War II. Fifty years after his act of bravery, Vernon Baker accepted the medal in a White House ceremony. Franking cannot be used for personal business or for political campaigns. It can be used only on letters mailed to constituents. Importance of Party Affiliation Many procedures in Congress are organized around the political party affiliation of members. In both the House and Senate, the Republicans sit on the right side of the chamber, the Democrats on the left. In each house the majority party selects the leaders of that body, controls the flow of legislative work, and appoints committee chairs. The power to organize the House explains why some conservative Democrats switched to the Republican Party when it became the majority party in Congress after the 1994 election. The Republican majority began sweeping changes of House rules in 1995, promoted to make the House more accountable. The new rules provided for fewer committees, fewer staff members, term limits for chairpersons and the Speaker, and an end to absentee voting in committees. Despite strong resistance from the Democratic leaders in the House, the new Republican majority was able to push through the reforms. House Leadership Organized leadership coordinates the work of the 435 individual members of the House of Representatives. The Constitution provides only for the presiding officer of the House. Other than that, the House chooses all its other leaders. The Speaker of the House The Speaker of the House is the presiding officer of the House and its most powerful leader. The Constitution states that the House shall choose their Speaker and other officers. A caucus, or closed meeting, of the majority party chooses the House Speaker at the start of each session of Congress, and the entire House membership approves the choice of Speaker. As both the presiding officer of the House and the leader of the majority party, the Speaker has great power. Presiding over the sessions of the House, the Speaker can influence proceedings by deciding which members to recognize first. The Speaker also appoints the members of some committees, schedules bills for action, and refers bills to the proper House committee. Finally, the Speaker of the House follows the vice president in the line of succession to the presidency. Today, Speakers rely as much on persuasion as on their formal powers to exercise influence. On a typical day, the Speaker may talk with dozens of fellow members of Congress. Often the Speaker does so just to listen to requests for a favor. In return, the Speaker expects representatives support on important issues. House Floor Leaders The Speakers top assistant is the majority leader. The majority leader is the floor leader of his or her political party in the House and, like the Speaker, is elected by the majority party. Thus, the majority leader is not actually a House official but a party official. The majority leader has help from the majority whip and deputy whips. These whips serve as assistant floor leaders in the House. The minority party in the House also elects its own leaders. These include the minority leader and the minority whips. Lawmaking in the House To a visitor, the floor of the House of Representatives may seem totally disorganized. Some representatives talk in small groups or read newspapers. Others constantly walk in and out of the chamber. Most representatives are not even on the floor, because they are in committee meetings, talking with voters, or taking care of other business. Representatives reach the floor quickly, however, when it is time for debate or a vote on proposed bills. Usually, the House starts its floor sessions at noon or earlier. Buzzers ring in members offices in the House office buildings, committee rooms, and in the Capitol, calling representatives. The House is normally in session from Monday through Friday. Mondays are for routine work. Not much is done on Friday because many representatives leave to go to their home districts over the weekend. Thus, most of the Houses important work is done from Tuesday through Thursday. How House Bills Are Scheduled All laws start as bills. 6 yrs. 6 yrs. 4 yrs. 6 yrs. Number varies. Normal attendance is 300, but many more vote on key decisions. Critical Thinking Culture and history play large roles in how legislatures are formed around the world. How to raise the question of consideration and how to vote 6. Rules of order had their origin in early British Parliaments. Many groups use Roberts Rules of Order, first published in 1876 by U.S. Robert. Roberts Rules addresses such issues as 1. How to make a motion and how to amend a motion 2. What rank or precedence various kinds of motions have 3. How to table or suspend a motion L president signs it. According to the procedure currently in place, to introduce a bill in the House, representatives drop it into the hopper, a mahogany box that is accessible to all near the front of the chamber. After a bill is introduced, the Speaker of the House sends it to the appropriate committee for study, discussion, and review. Of the thousands of bills and resolutions introduced during each legislative term of Congress, only about 10 to 20 percent ever go to the full House for a vote. Bills that survive the committee process are put on one of the House calendars. Calendars list bills that are up for consideration. The House has five calendars. Three are used to schedule different kinds of bills for consideration. The Union Calendar lists bills dealing with money issues. Most other public bills are put on the House Calendar. The Private Calendar lists bills that deal with individual people or places. Any bill that the House gives unanimous consent to debate out of regular order is listed on the Consent Calendar. Finally, the Discharge Calendar is used for petitions to discharge a bill from committee. Obtain a copy of Roberts Rules of Order. Appoint a small group to find rules pertaining to the items listed above. Discuss the needs of a small group meeting (about the size of your class). Write rules for such a meeting based on these needs. 2. Choose a presiding officer for a meeting of your government class and a parliamentarian to enforce the rules. Hold a meeting in which the class determines an issue to discuss, hears opinions from the floor, and decides whether to take any action. The House Rules Committee The Rules Committee serves as the traffic officer in the House, helping to direct the flow of major legislation. It is one of the oldest House committees, and the most powerful. After a committee has considered and approved a major bill, it usually goes to the Rules Committee. The Rules Committee can move bills ahead quickly, hold them back, or stop them completely. Because the Rules Committee has the power to decide how and when legislation will be considered by the House, it has often been the focus of political battles. From 1858 to 1910, the Speaker of the House, as chair of the Rules Committee, dominated the flow of legislation. In 1911 the House revolted against Speaker Joseph G. Cannons authoritarian leadership and removed him from the Rules Committee. In 1975 Democratic majorities in the House once again placed the Rules Committee under control of the Speaker. A former Speaker explained The Rules Committee is an agent of the leadership. It is what distinguishes us from the Senate, where the rules deliberately favor those who would delay. The rules of the House permit a majority to work its will on legislation rather than allow it to be bottled up and stymied. Speaker Jim Wright, 1987 ahead. The Rules Committee may also include a time limit for debate on the bill and specify how much the bill may be amended on the floor. Other Purposes of the Rules Committee Republicans became the majority party in the House of Representatives in 1995. Their new Speaker, Newt Gingrich, as minority leader in the previous Congress had sparked an ethics investigation that resulted in Speaker Jim Wrights resignation. Gingrich asserted the power to appoint committee chairpersons, including the leader of the powerful Rules Committee. The Rules Committee also settles disputes among other House committees. For example, the Armed Services Committee may be considering a bill that involves an area also covered by the Veterans Affairs Committee. The Rules Committee can help resolve any dispute between the two committees. Finally, the Rules Committee often delays or blocks bills that representatives and House leaders do not want to come to a vote on the floor. In this way the Rules Committee draws criticism away from members who might have to take an unpopular stand on a bill if it reaches the floor. As major bills come out of committee, they are entered on either the Union Calendar or the House Calendar in the order received. The calendars have so many bills that if they were taken up in that order, many would never reach the floor before the end of the session. To resolve this problem, the chairperson of the committee that sent the bill to the Rules Committee may ask for it to move ahead of other bills and to be sent to the House floor. If the Rules Committee grants the request, the bill moves A quorum is the minimum number of members who must be present to permit a legislative body to take official action. For a regular session, a quorum consists of the majority of the House218 members. When the House meets to debate and amend legislation it may often sit as a Committee of the Whole. In that case, only 100 members constitute a quorum. This procedure helps speed the consideration of important bills. The Committee of the Whole cannot pass a bill. Instead, it reports the measure back to the full House with whatever changes it has made. The House then has the authority to pass or reject the bill.
