Senators handle issues of specific interest to them in their committees, but they also deal with many other issues on the floor, where there is plenty of time for debate. Senators, who represent entire states, are expected to know something about and deal with many issues from national defense to social issues to farming. At first, Cl e. The Senate chamber is smaller than the House chamber. Usually only a few senators attend sessions. Informal Atmosphere In the Senate, the rules are more flexible than in the House. They are designed to make certain that all senators have maximum freedom to express their ideas. For example, the Senate usually allows unlimited debate on proposed legislation. Senate rules are spelled out in fewer than 100 pages. With fewer rules, the Senate has a more informal atmosphere than the House. They may debate a proposal on and off for weeks or even months before taking action on an issue. Senate Leaders Leadership in the Senate closely parallels leadership in the House, but the Senate has no Speaker. The vice president presides in the Senate, but may not vote except to break a tie. Also, Senate procedures permit individual senators more freedom in their activities. Consequently, party leaders in the Senate may not have as much influence over other senators as their counterparts in the House. The Vice President The Constitution names the vice president as president of the Senate. The vice president, however, does not have the same role and power as the Speaker of the House. The vice president may recognize members and put questions to a vote. Because the vice president is not an elected member of the Senate, he or she may not take part in Senate debates. The vice president may, if the situation warrants, cast a vote in the Senate, but only in the event of a tie. A vice president may try to influence the Senate through personal contact with senators, however. Many recent vice presidents previously served as senators and thus had close relationships with their former colleagues. The Senate elects this leader. Majority and Minority Floor Leaders The majority and minority leaders are the most important officers in the Senate. Elected by the members of their political parties, the majority and minority leaders in the Senate are party officials rather than official Senate officers. To do this, the majority leader plans the Senates work schedule and agenda in consultation with the minority leader. The majority leader is responsible for making certain the majority party members attend important Senate sessions and for organizing their support on key bills. Past In 60 B.C., Cato the Younger initiated a filibuster to block Caesars election as consul. Legislative Techniques Often senators simply threaten to filibuster to defeat legislative bills. Why would these threats work 139 whips assist the majority and minority leaders of the Senate by making sure that legislators are present for key votes. How Senate Bills Are Scheduled As in the House, any member of the Senate may introduce a bill. Procedures for moving bills through the Senate, however, are more informal than in the House. Because it is smaller, the Senate has never needed a committee like the House Rules Committee. Instead, Senate leaders control the flow of bills to committees and to the floor for debate and vote. They do this by consulting closely with one another and with other senators. The Senate has only two calendars. The Calendar of General Orders lists all the bills the Senate will consider, while the Executive Calendar schedules treaties and nominations. The Senate brings bills to the floor by unanimous consent, a motion by all members present to set aside formal rules and consider a bill from the calendar. The procedure has not changed much through the years. Henry Cabot Lodge, 1913 The Filibuster Because the Senate usually allows unlimited debate on any bill under consideration, one way for senators to defeat a bill they oppose is to filibuster against it. To filibuster means to stall the legislative process and prevent a vote. Stall tactics include talking continuously, delaying issues in committee, and other procedural roadblocks. A filibuster by a group of senators could go on for weeks or even months. Cloture is a procedure that allows each senator to speak only 1 hour on a bill under debate. Obtaining a vote in favor of cloture, however, is usually difficult, especially when each party controls close to the same number of Senate seats. The filibuster is not commonly utilized as a legislative tactic in the Senate today. Senate rules now allow other matters to continue during a filibuster, weakening the filibusters effectiveness. Because of the close division of political parties in the Senate, the simple threat of a filibuster is often enough to delay or defeat a bill. Politics As in the House, Senate procedures are organized around the members party affiliations. Republicans sit on the right side of the chamber, while Democrats sit on the left. More importantly, the majority party controls the flow of legislative work. Main Idea In a graphic organizer similar to the one at the right, analyze Minority Majority the relationship between the Senate majority and minority leaders, whips, and assistant whips. 2. 3. Identify Calendar of General Orders. 4. How does the Senate bring bills to the floor 5. Making Comparisons Compare the rules and procedures of the House with those of the Senate. Use one of the speeches as a model for a persuasive speech of your own. Sometimes the hearings are more exciting and informative than the floor debates that follow. Committees help ease the workload and are the key power centers in Congress. The committee system serves several important purposes. First, it allows members of Congress to divide their work among many smaller groups. Lawmakers can become specialists on the issues their committees consider. Second, from the huge number of bills introduced in each Congress, committees select those few that are to receive further consideration. Committees are the places in which lawmakers listen to supporters and opponents of a bill. It is in committees where they work out compromises, and decide which bills will or will not have a chance to become law. Most bills never get beyond the committee stage. Third, by holding public hearings and investigations, committees help the public learn about key problems and issues facing the nation. Congress may, however, change the method of committee organization and the number of committees. Standing Committees Very early in its history, Congress set up permanent groups to oversee bills that dealt with certain kinds of issues. These are called standing committees because they continue from one Congress to the next. The House and Senate each create their own standing committees and control their areas of jurisdiction, occasionally adding or eliminating a standing committee when necessary. The majority party has power to write the rules in Congress. Republicans made changes in the structure and titles of several committees when they became the majority in 1995. The last major realignment of standing committees in the Senate took place in 1977. Because the majority party in each house controls the standing committees, it selects a chairperson for each from among its party members. The majority of the members of each standing committee are also members of the majority party. This computer chip enables parents to block out shows that have been coded as violent, lewd, or inappropriate for young children. For example, if 60 percent of the members of the House are Republicans, then 60 percent of the members of each House standing committee will be Republicans. Thus, a 10member committee would have 6 Republicans and 4 Democrats. However, the party in power in the House will often have a super majority on the most important committees. Subcommittees Nearly all standing committees have several subcommittees. Each subcommittee specializes in a subcategory of its standing committees responsibility. Subcommittees, like standing committees, usually continue from one Congress to the next, although the majority party may make changes. For example, House Republicans in the 104th Congress limited most committees to no more than five subcommittees. The exceptions were Appropriations with 13 subcommittees, Government Reform and Oversight with 7 subcommittees, and Transportation and Infrastructure with 6 subcommittees. Select Committees From time to time, each house of Congress has created temporary committees. Usually, these committees, called select committees, study one specific issue and report their findings to the Senate or the House. These issues politicians a way of taking action on TV violence without stirring up a controversy over censorship. The House rules adopted in the 104th Congress limited most standing committees to no more than five subcommittees. What is the difference between standing committees and select committees can include (1) matters of great public concern, such as organized crime (2) overlooked problems, such as hunger or (3) problems of interest groups, such as owners of small business, who claim that Congress has not met their needs. Select committees usually cannot report bills to their parent chamber, however. Select committees were usually set up to last for no more than one term of Congress. In practice, however, select committees may be renewed and continue to meet for several terms of Congress. For this reason, both the House and Senate have reclassified several select committees, such as the Select Intelligence Committee, as permanent committees. In 1993 the House terminated four select committees. Joint Committees Made up of members from both the House and the Senate, joint committees may be either temporary or permanent. Like other committees, they have members from both political parties. In theory, joint committees coordinate the work of the two houses of Congress. In practice, lawmakers usually limit joint committees to handling routine matters such as are handled by the Joint Committee on Printing, and the Joint Committee on the Library of Congress. Evaluate the motivation behind requests for committee assignments. Why would a senator seek assignment to judiciary, foreign relations, or budget committees To committees that could benefit his or her constituents defense, and taxation. Joint committees do not have the authority to deal directly with bills or to propose legislation to Congress. Conference Committees No bill can be sent from Congress to the president until both houses have passed it in identical form. A conference committee is a temporary committee set up when the House and Senate have passed different versions of the same bill. Members of the conference committee, called conferees, usually come from the House and Senate standing committees that handled the bill in question. Democrats and Republicans are represented in the same way here as on other committees. The job of the conference committee is to resolve the differences between the two versions of the bill. Conference committees play a key role in policy making because they work out a bill that both houses may accept and send to the president. The committee accomplishes this task by bargaining over each section of the bill. It must be accepted or rejected as it is when it comes from the conference committee. Choosing Committee Members Membership in congressional committees is extremely important to the role played by members of Congress. Assignment to the right committees can help strengthen a members career in several ways. First, membership on some committees can increase a lawmakers chances for reelection. For freshmen, the best committees may be those that deal with bills that will benefit a lawmakers state or district. Second, membership on some committees can mean the lawmaker will be able to influence national policy making. Committees that often help formulate national policies include those dealing with education, the budget, health, the judiciary, and foreign policy. Third, some committees enable a member to exert influence over other lawmakers because they deal with matters important to everyone in Congress. Some of these committees include the House Rules Committee and taxation and appropriations committees. In the House the key committees are Rules, Ways and Means, and Appropriations. In the Senate the most prestigious committees are Foreign Relations, Finance, and Appropriations. Assignment to the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, for example, will give a lawmaker a chance to directly influence American foreign policy. Senators on this committee usually receive a great deal of publicity. Assignment to Committees In both the House and Senate, the political parties assign members to the standing committees. Newly elected members of Congress who wish to serve on a particular committee or veteran lawmakers who wish to transfer to another committee may request assignment to the committees on which they want to serve. Each member may only serve on a limited number of standing committees and subcommittees. The Committee Chairpersons Role Along with party leaders, the chairpersons of standing committees are the most powerful members of Congress. They decide when hearings will be held and which witnesses will be called to testify for or against a bill. In addition, chairpersons may hire committee staff members and control the committee budget. Finally, they manage the floor debates that take place on the bills that come from their committees. The Legislative Reorganization Act of 1970 made the committee system more democratic by allowing a majority of committee members to call meetings without the chairpersons approval. It also stated that committee members who disagree with the chairperson must have time to present their views and that reasonable notice must be given for all committee hearings. Rule changes in 1995 prohibited the chairperson from casting an absent members vote and required committees to publish all members votes. The Seniority System The unwritten rule of seniority traditionally has guided the selection of chairpersons. The seniority system gave the member of the majority party with the longest uninterrupted service on a particular committee the leadership of that committee. Criticism of the seniority system has resulted in several changes. In 1973 the Democrats, who were the majority party in the House, adopted the same procedure. In a historic action in 1975, House Democrats voted to replace three senior committee chairpersons. In 1995 Republicans also bypassed several senior members up for chairs and ruled that chairpersons of House committees could hold their positions for no more than three consecutive terms.
