Sometimes the hearings are more exciting and informative than the floor debates that follow. Committees help ease the workload and are the key power centers in Congress. The committee system serves several important purposes. First, it allows members of Congress to divide their work among many smaller groups. Lawmakers can become specialists on the issues their committees consider. Second, from the huge number of bills introduced in each Congress, committees select those few that are to receive further consideration. Committees are the places in which lawmakers listen to supporters and opponents of a bill. It is in committees where they work out compromises, and decide which bills will or will not have a chance to become law. Most bills never get beyond the committee stage. Third, by holding public hearings and investigations, committees help the public learn about key problems and issues facing the nation. Congress may, however, change the method of committee organization and the number of committees. Standing Committees Very early in its history, Congress set up permanent groups to oversee bills that dealt with certain kinds of issues. These are called standing committees because they continue from one Congress to the next. The House and Senate each create their own standing committees and control their areas of jurisdiction, occasionally adding or eliminating a standing committee when necessary. The majority party has power to write the rules in Congress. Republicans made changes in the structure and titles of several committees when they became the majority in 1995. The last major realignment of standing committees in the Senate took place in 1977. Because the majority party in each house controls the standing committees, it selects a chairperson for each from among its party members. The majority of the members of each standing committee are also members of the majority party. This computer chip enables parents to block out shows that have been coded as violent, lewd, or inappropriate for young children. For example, if 60 percent of the members of the House are Republicans, then 60 percent of the members of each House standing committee will be Republicans. Thus, a 10member committee would have 6 Republicans and 4 Democrats. However, the party in power in the House will often have a super majority on the most important committees. Subcommittees Nearly all standing committees have several subcommittees. Each subcommittee specializes in a subcategory of its standing committees responsibility. Subcommittees, like standing committees, usually continue from one Congress to the next, although the majority party may make changes. For example, House Republicans in the 104th Congress limited most committees to no more than five subcommittees. The exceptions were Appropriations with 13 subcommittees, Government Reform and Oversight with 7 subcommittees, and Transportation and Infrastructure with 6 subcommittees. Select Committees From time to time, each house of Congress has created temporary committees. Usually, these committees, called select committees, study one specific issue and report their findings to the Senate or the House. These issues politicians a way of taking action on TV violence without stirring up a controversy over censorship. The House rules adopted in the 104th Congress limited most standing committees to no more than five subcommittees. What is the difference between standing committees and select committees can include (1) matters of great public concern, such as organized crime (2) overlooked problems, such as hunger or (3) problems of interest groups, such as owners of small business, who claim that Congress has not met their needs. Select committees usually cannot report bills to their parent chamber, however. Select committees were usually set up to last for no more than one term of Congress. In practice, however, select committees may be renewed and continue to meet for several terms of Congress. For this reason, both the House and Senate have reclassified several select committees, such as the Select Intelligence Committee, as permanent committees. In 1993 the House terminated four select committees. Joint Committees Made up of members from both the House and the Senate, joint committees may be either temporary or permanent. Like other committees, they have members from both political parties. In theory, joint committees coordinate the work of the two houses of Congress. In practice, lawmakers usually limit joint committees to handling routine matters such as are handled by the Joint Committee on Printing, and the Joint Committee on the Library of Congress. Evaluate the motivation behind requests for committee assignments. Why would a senator seek assignment to judiciary, foreign relations, or budget committees To committees that could benefit his or her constituents defense, and taxation. Joint committees do not have the authority to deal directly with bills or to propose legislation to Congress. Conference Committees No bill can be sent from Congress to the president until both houses have passed it in identical form. A conference committee is a temporary committee set up when the House and Senate have passed different versions of the same bill. Members of the conference committee, called conferees, usually come from the House and Senate standing committees that handled the bill in question. Democrats and Republicans are represented in the same way here as on other committees. The job of the conference committee is to resolve the differences between the two versions of the bill. Conference committees play a key role in policy making because they work out a bill that both houses may accept and send to the president. The committee accomplishes this task by bargaining over each section of the bill. It must be accepted or rejected as it is when it comes from the conference committee. Choosing Committee Members Membership in congressional committees is extremely important to the role played by members of Congress. Assignment to the right committees can help strengthen a members career in several ways. First, membership on some committees can increase a lawmakers chances for reelection. For freshmen, the best committees may be those that deal with bills that will benefit a lawmakers state or district. Second, membership on some committees can mean the lawmaker will be able to influence national policy making. Committees that often help formulate national policies include those dealing with education, the budget, health, the judiciary, and foreign policy. Third, some committees enable a member to exert influence over other lawmakers because they deal with matters important to everyone in Congress. Some of these committees include the House Rules Committee and taxation and appropriations committees. In the House the key committees are Rules, Ways and Means, and Appropriations. In the Senate the most prestigious committees are Foreign Relations, Finance, and Appropriations. Assignment to the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, for example, will give a lawmaker a chance to directly influence American foreign policy. Senators on this committee usually receive a great deal of publicity. Assignment to Committees In both the House and Senate, the political parties assign members to the standing committees. Newly elected members of Congress who wish to serve on a particular committee or veteran lawmakers who wish to transfer to another committee may request assignment to the committees on which they want to serve. Each member may only serve on a limited number of standing committees and subcommittees. The Committee Chairpersons Role Along with party leaders, the chairpersons of standing committees are the most powerful members of Congress. They decide when hearings will be held and which witnesses will be called to testify for or against a bill. In addition, chairpersons may hire committee staff members and control the committee budget. Finally, they manage the floor debates that take place on the bills that come from their committees. The Legislative Reorganization Act of 1970 made the committee system more democratic by allowing a majority of committee members to call meetings without the chairpersons approval. It also stated that committee members who disagree with the chairperson must have time to present their views and that reasonable notice must be given for all committee hearings. Rule changes in 1995 prohibited the chairperson from casting an absent members vote and required committees to publish all members votes. The Seniority System The unwritten rule of seniority traditionally has guided the selection of chairpersons. The seniority system gave the member of the majority party with the longest uninterrupted service on a particular committee the leadership of that committee. Criticism of the seniority system has resulted in several changes. In 1973 the Democrats, who were the majority party in the House, adopted the same procedure. In a historic action in 1975, House Democrats voted to replace three senior committee chairpersons. In 1995 Republicans also bypassed several senior members up for chairs and ruled that chairpersons of House committees could hold their positions for no more than three consecutive terms. Main Idea In a Venn diagram, show how a conference committee Conference Joint and a joint committee both are alike and how they are different. 2. Define standing committee, subcommittee, select committee, joint committee, conference committee, seniority system. 3. Identify Select Intelligence, Rules, Ways and Means, Appropriations Committees. 4. List four important powers of a committee chairperson. 5. Making Inferences Why did Republicans, when they won control of Congress in 1995, institute many rule changes Political Processes Watch coverage of a congressional committee on television, or read about it in a newspaper. Outline the major issues presented in the testimony before the committee. Write a position paper in which you agree or disagree with the witnesses. Staff members also carry out the work of congressional committees. In addition, a number of supporting agencies perform important functions for members. At the same time Congress adopted a resolution to cut the legislative branch budget and reduced the budget of the General Accounting Office. Such staff reductions are rare. The dog, shipped as animal cargo, had died in flight. One of the senators secretaries mentioned the letter to the press secretary, who thought that perhaps the incident had news value. He phoned the Federal Aviation Agency and other government offices and found that there had been many similar cases. After informing the senator, the secretary wrote a draft of a bill to authorize the Transportation Department to regulate air transport of animals. This story illustrates that congressional staff members do much of the important work on legislation. Lawmakers rely on their staffs to help them handle the growing workload of Congress, communicate with voters, help run committee hearings and floor sessions, draft new bills, write committee reports, and attend committee meetings. Congressional staffs also help lawmakers get reelected. Staffers help members of Congress get publicity, keep an eye on political developments back home, and write speeches and newsletters. They also help raise funds for election campaigns and meet with lobbyists and visitors from home. Congressional Staff Growth Congress has not always relied on staff to accomplish its work. For almost 100 years, senators and representatives had no personal aides. Occasionally they might hire assistants out of personal funds, but Congress provided no paid staff. Inadequate staffing had become an urgent complaint by the time Congress considered the Legislative Reorganization Act in 1946. The House and Senate employed 2,000 personal staff members in 1947, but more than 11,500 in 1990. Committee staff increased from 400 to more than 3,000 in that same period. Congressional staffs grew as lawmaking became more complex after the early 1900s. Lawmakers could not be experts on all the issues that came before their committees or upon which they voted in Congress. Having a large staff became one way to get expert help. Also, the demands that constituents placed on lawmakers increased over the years. Members of Congress needed a large office staff simply to deal with the many letters from people in their states or congressional districts. In addition to writing to their senators and representatives, voters in increasing numbers have turned to their lawmakers for help in solving problems. One lawmaker explained, More than half my total staff time is devoted to resolving individual difficulties that have developed between citizens and their government. The size of senators personal staffs varies because allowances to pay for them are based on the population of the senators state and distance from the capital. Senators each receive a yearly budget to operate their offices. Most of this amount is to pay staff salaries. The rest work in Washington, D.C. Each member of the House has an allowance to pay for a personal staff. The House and Senate employ thousands of personal staff aides. Lawmakers can hire and fire staff members at will. Administrative Assistants Lawmakers usually have three types of personal staff members in their offices. The administrative assistant, called an AA, is a very important legislative aide. A good AA also deals with influential people from the lawmakers congressional district or state, who may influence the lawmakers reelection. An Expanding Government Personal Staff Public Perceptions Congress includes two types of staffs personal staff and committee staff. Personal staff cartoonist enhance with this cartoon Members of Congress must balance the need for large staffs with the need to cut government spending. An LA makes certain that the lawmaker is well informed about the many bills with which she or he must deal. An LA does research, drafts bills, studies bills currently in Congress, and writes speeches and articles for the lawmaker. Senators and representatives are members of so many committees and subcommittees that they cannot possibly attend all the committee meetings. When they do attend committee meetings, they often come in at the last minute and briefly talk with their LA to find out what has taken place. The LA, who has followed the meeting and studied the bill in question, may have prepared a short speech for the lawmaker or made up a list of questions for the lawmaker to ask Aiding Lawmakers witnesses. While routine legislative business goes on, the lawmaker may be in a committee meeting or talking with voters. When the buzzer rings, signaling time for a vote, lawmakers rush to the floor of the Senate or House from their offices or committee rooms. They may not know what the vote is about unless it involves a major bill that has been scheduled long in advance. If they did not know what they were voting on (votes occurred frequently throughout the day, and it was hard to keep track), they would glance to the side to see if someone were waiting. In addition to their offices in Washington, D.C., lawmakers are likely to have offices in key cities in their home district. Caseworkers usually staff these offices. Committee Staff Influencing Congress Members of Congress, like Representative Maxine Waters, depend on their legislative aides. The larger a committee is, the more staff people it will likely have. The committee chairperson and the senior minority party member of the committee are in charge of these staff members. Committee staffers draft bills, study issues, collect information, plan committee hearings, write memos, and prepare committee reports. They are largely responsible for the work involved in making laws. Some senior committee staff members are very experienced and are experts in the area their committee covers, whether it be tax policy, foreign affairs, or health care. As the committees staff director for 14 years, he was largely responsible for all changes in the tax laws. Supporting Congress Too Much Power The people do not elect congressional staffers. Yet they play a key role in lawmaking. Do they have too much influence Some lawmakers believe they do. Other lawmakers disagree. They say that the staff really collects information and develops alternative courses of action for the lawmakers. Support Agencies Several agencies that are part of the legislative branch provide services that help Congress carry out its powers. Congress has created four important support agencies. Today, it is one of the largest libraries in the world. This great center of information contains more than 100 million items, including books, journals, music, films, photographs, and maps. As the administrator of the copyright law, the copyright office in the Library receives two free copies of most published works copyrighted in the United States. The Main Reading Room is the center of the greatest research library in the United States. The agency has a professional staff of about 3,300 people. They review the financial management of government programs that Congress creates, collect government debts, settle claims, and provide legal service. It does the printing for the entire federal government. Members of Congress can make changes in speeches they have made before they are printed in the Record. They can even have speeches they never actually made in the House or Senate printed in the Record. Congressional staff members spend a good deal of time preparing speeches for lawmakers because those words will be inserted in the Congressional Record. Thus, when voters ask about the lawmakers position on a particular issue, the staff can send a copy of the Record containing a speech the lawmaker made on that issue to the constituent making the request. Another valuable publication of the Government Printing Office is the Statistical Abstract of the United States, updated and printed every year since 1878. Published by the Bureau of the Census, this volume provides statistical information about population, government finances, personal income, business, agriculture, education, law enforcement, national defense, elections, and many other topics. The support agencies provide a vital function for Congress. They have helped the legislative branch become less dependent on the executive branch for information.
