Section 3, authorizes Congress to admit new states and pass laws needed to govern any territories. The Founders envisioned such property as military bases and government buildings. Other Legislative Powers Article I, Section 8,1 gives Congress the power to grant copyrights and patents. Under the present law, this period is the lifetime of the creator plus 50 See the following footnoted materials in the Reference Handbook 1. The Constitution, pages 774 799. Vietnam War hat years. A patent is the exclusive right of an inventor to manufacture, use, and sell his or her invention for a specific period, currently 17 years (after which a patent may be renewed). Article I, Section 8, also grants Congress the power to establish a post office and federal courts. Congress has also used its postal power to combat criminal activity using the mail for any illegal act is a federal crime. The Power to Choose a President The Constitution requires a joint session of Congress to count the Electoral College votes. Each states House delegation has one vote. If a majority of the House votes to impeach a public official, the Senate conducts the trial. When the impeachment proceedings involve a president, the Chief Justice of the United States presides. However, the Senate acquitted President Andrew Johnson by only one vote in 1868. President Richard Nixon would have been the second president impeached had he not resigned in 1974. During the Senate trial, Senators considered whether the charges against President Clinton, if proven, were serious enough to warrant removal from office. The Confirmation Power The Senate has the power to approve presidential appointments of federal officials. It is, therefore, possible that the vice president could be from a different party than the president. Only two times in American history has no presidential candidate captured a majority of the electoral votes. In 1800 the House elected Thomas Jefferson over Aaron Burr, and in 1824 it chose John Quincy Adams over Andrew Jackson. During the 1970s, two vice presidents gained office under this amendment. See the following footnoted materials in the Reference Handbook 1. The Constitution, pages 774 799. The Senate has rejected about 20 percent of Court nominations. The Ratification Power Article II, Section 2, of the Constitution gives the Senate the exclusive power to ratify treaties between the United States and other nations. This power is one of the key ways in which Congress helps shape foreign policy. This opposition prevented a vote, and the treaty was not ratified. These agreements do not require Senate approval. Such a convention has never been called. This method, however, raises important constitutional questions. Congress has considered, but not acted on, measures that would limit constitutional conventions to the issues pro posed in state petitions to Congress. The states have approved 27 proposed amendments and have failed to ratify only 6. Main Idea In a chart like the one below, list two or more examples of powers the Constitution expresses, implies, and denies to Congress. Denied Implied Expressed 2. 3. 4. State the foreign policy powers of Congress. 5. Describe the process by which Congress may remove a member of the executive or judicial branch from office. Critical Thinking 6. Drawing Conclusions Do you think Gibbons v. Ogden provided a basis for the Supreme Courts position in Heart of Atlanta Motel v. United States that a hotel is a part of interstate commerce Explain. Constitutional Interpretations Research legislation that Congress passed in a recent session. Identify any bills you believe were based on the power to regulate interstate commerce. Draw a political cartoon supporting or criticizing the legislation. Kuhn et al., 1972 With teams from New York to California, professional baseball is not only a sport but also a business engaged in interstate commerce. Is baseball subject to federal antitrust laws like other businesses Do baseball players have the right to act as free agents and make their own contracts with the team that will pay the most The case of Flood v. Kuhn dealt with these questions. Curt Flood Background of the Case In twelve seasons with the St. In 1969, without consulting him, St. Flood asked that he be allowed to act as a free agent. The commissioner refused, stating that base balls reserve clause meant that each player was tied indefinitely to one club, unless that club want ed to trade the player. Flood sat out the 1970 season and took his case to the courts. Two lower courts ruled in favor of the owners. Supported by the players union, Flood appealed. In 1972 the case came to the Supreme Court. By then Curt Flood had left baseball and never played again. In 1922 in Federal Baseball Club v. Furthermore, it stated that Congress had al lowed baseball to develop exempt from antitrust laws rather than subject to them. Debating the Case Debating the Case Questions to Consider 1. What could be the consequences for baseball if the Court ruled in favor of Curt Flood of the St. Louis Cardinals 3. To rule in Curt Floods favor the Court would have to overturn its ruling in the earlier cases. How would you rule 166 167171 CH06S2860053 12104 244 AM Page 167 S e c t i o n 2 S e c t i o n 2 Investigations and Oversight Readers Guide Most congressional powers fall into two of four categories. Investigations may last for several days or go on for months. Congressional investigations occur for many reasons. In 1998 the Senate Finance Committee opened hearings into the collection methods of the Internal Revenue Service. Congressional Powers and Witness Rights Although congressional investigations are not trials, Congress has several powers that help committees collect evidence. A subpoena is a legal order that a person appear or produce requested documents. Congress makes great use of this power. Persons found in contempt of Congress may be arrested and jailed. Until recent years, witnesses called to testify in person before a congressional committee had few rights. We w ill determine what rights you have and what rights you do not have before the committee. Today this situation has changed, and witness es have important rights when appearing before a congressional committee. In Watkins v. The Court stated See the following footnoted materials in the Reference Handbook 1. Watkins v. United States case summary, page 767. They cannot be subjected to unreasonable search and seizure. Immunity is freedom from prosecution for witnesses whose testimony ties them to illegal acts. Of course, the Fifth Amendment states that people cannot be forced to testify against themselves. Those who refuse may be held in contempt and jailed. A Senate committee investigated charges against officials in the Reagan administration. They were charged with selling arms to Iran and using the money to finance a guerrilla war in Nicaragua. North implicated the presidents national security adviser and others. North was tried and convicted. In exercising its oversight power, congressional committees keep watch over these agencies of the executive branch. Congress makes the laws. The job of the executive branch is to carry them out. In doing so, the executive branch has the power to decide what legislation means and how it should be put into effect. Through its power of legislative oversight, Congress can check on how the executive branch is administering the law. Congress has defined its oversight functions in several laws. The Legislative Reorganization Act of 1946 calls for Congress to exercise continuous watchfulness over executive agencies. The committee hearings focused on how American politics and policies may have been inappropriately influenced. Instead, legislative oversight usually occurs in bits and pieces as congressional staffs and committees go about their business. There are several reasons that legislative over sight is not carried out consistently. Second, lawmakers know there are not many votes to be gained from most oversight activities. As one lawmaker aptly put it, Where there is publicity to be gained, there is oversight to be had. Third, the language of some laws is so vague that it is very difficult to judge exactly what they mean. Finally, committees sometimes come to favor the federal agencies they are supposed to oversee. In such cases there exists a danger that a committee may not engage in careful, critical oversight of an agency. Congressional Limits on Executive Activities Congress exercises its oversight power in several ways. The 1946 Employment Act, for example, requires the president to send Congress an annual report on the nations economy. During a recent term of Congress, federal agencies submit ted more than 1,000 such reports to Capitol Hill. Prior to the new rules, deaf people could become pilots in the United States if they used airports that did not require radio contact. The pro posed rules were really the result of a misunderstanding. I thought that most deaf people could speak and read lips, Lynch said. Robin made me realize that was not always the case. Lynch said the ruling was not intended to keep deaf people from flying. The power of Congress to appropriate money provides another means of oversight. Each year Congress reviews the budgets of all agencies in the executive branch. This review allows Congress to shape public policy by expanding, reducing, or eliminating certain programs. For years Congress used the legislative veto, in which Congress wrote provisions into some laws that allowed it to review and cancel actions of the executive agencies that carried out those laws. In 1983 the Supreme Court ruled in Immigration and Naturalization Service v. Independent Counsel In 1978 Congress passed the Ethics in Government Act in an attempt to ensure that allegations of wrongdoing by high government officials would receive fair investigation. Support for the law eroded, however, as many people complained Special Delivery Sometimes, extreme measures are taken to deliver a congressional bill to the president for his signature. A White House aide took a commercial flight from Washington, D.C., to the nation of Brunei to give President Clinton a resolution that needed to be signed no later than November 15, 2000. The funding bill allowed government operations to continue until Congress reconvened. In 1999 Congress let the law expire and gave the Attorney General sole power to conduct ethics investigations of top officials. Main Idea Using a graphic organizer like the one shown, identify the steps Congress can take 2. 2. Define subpoena, perjury, contempt, immunity, legislative veto. 3. Identify Watkins v. 4. Identify three congressional investigations that focused on the executive branch. 1. Critical Thinking 5. Prepare a news broadcast to present to the class in which you analyze the purpose of the investigation and its findings. You might want to include interviews as well. Nevertheless, they did create a system of checks and balances that can result in a government stalemate. When the Congress refuses to cooperate, the president may be frustrated. Overriding a presidential veto requires a two thirds majority in each house of Congress, which usually is difficult to obtain. Consequently, a veto or even the threat of one is an important legislative power the president exercises. Those who propose major new programs w ill almost surely come into conflict with the legislative branch. For example, the president may threaten a veto, arguing that a particular bill spends too much money and would spur inflation harmful to the nation. Some members of Congress may co operate to in attempting amend the bill or override a veto because their states or districts would benefit from the bill. This is especially evident when the different par ties control the White House and Congress. In recent decades the presidents party rarely has controlled both houses of Congress, so conflict between the branches has increased. The legislative process slowed considerably in 1995 when President Clinton, a Democrat, faced Re publican majorities in Congress. The question in the next two years, will be whether that lack of mandate for either side will foster cooperation to get things done or positioning to do battle in the next election. Curtis B. According to the cartoon, is gridlock a problem that is quickly or easily resolved Explain. Organization as a Cause of Conflict The organization of Congress provides many weapons to those who want to resist a legislative proposal of the president. Even when congressional leaders support the president, they may struggle to push presidential initiatives through Congress. Because the basic shape of legislation is set in committees and subcommittees, the committee system also may be a weapon against the president. Committee chairpersons are powerful members of Congress, and they use their positions to influence bills. At best, they have only eight years to accomplish their agenda. Adams Jefferson Madison Monroe J.Q. Harrison Tyler Polk Taylor Fillmore Pierce Buchanan Lincoln A. Johnson Grant Hayes Garfield Arthur Cleveland (1st term) B. Harrison Cleveland (2d term) McKinley T. Roosevelt Taft Wilson Harding Coolidge Hoover F. Roosevelt Truman Eisenhower Kennedy L. Johnson Nixon Ford Carter Reagan G.H.W. Bush Clinton G.W. Critical Thinking Early presidents often vetoed legislation they thought was unconstitutional. Most can look forward to being reelected for many terms. Consequently, members of Congress have political timetables quite different from the president. Thus, law makers in both houses may not be eager to act on legislation that does not directly benefit their states or districts. The third year, you lose votes . At times, however, strong presidents such as Andrew Jackson, Abraham Lincoln, and Franklin D. Roosevelt challenged congressional supremacy. The system of checks and balances makes it likely that the president and Congress will always compete for power. Which branch will dominate in any specific period depends on many factors, including the political issues of the time and the leaders in Congress and the executive branch. President Franklin D. Roosevelt gained vast authority during the Great Depression and World War II. In 1933 Congress empowered the president to close the nations banks. Presidents must notify Congress when they intend to declare a national emergency. A state of emergency now cannot last more than one year unless the president repeats the process. Because of this, by the early 1970s Congress had slipped into the role of merely reacting to budget proposals. The law requires that appropriated funds be spent unless the president requests and both houses of Congress agree that the monies not be spent. Crisis and Power Additional Powers During World War II, President Franklin D. The veto was not widely used, however, until Congress reasserted its authority in the 1970s. Many members of Congress argued that the device was an effective check on the executive branch. Presidents have called the legislative veto a challenge to their authority. Since the Supreme Court ruling, Congress has searched for a constitutional alternative to the legislative veto. LineItem Veto The Constitution provides for a presidential veto of entire bills. Most governors, however, can veto parts of bills, letting the rest be come law. Sentiment for giving the president such veto power was strong in the mid1990s. Signed into law by President Clinton, the bill authorized the president to veto spending items and certain limited tax breaks. This act went into effect in 1997. The Supreme Court threw out this challenge but later ruled on the constitutional merits of the legislation. If there is to be a new procedure in which the President will play a different role such change must come not by legislation but through the amendment procedures set forth in Article V of the Constitution, Stevens concluded. Critical Thinking 6. Synthesizing Information One analyst described the constitutional system between Congress and the president as an invitation to struggle. Is this description accurate Explain. Congress 2. 3. Identify Congressional Budget Office. 4. Why do the different constituencies of the president and Congress cause conflict between the executive and legislative branches 5. How does the political party system contribute to conflict between the president and Congress Checks and Balances One struggle for power that exists between the president and Congress is the presidents right to send armed forces overseas. When has the president committed military forces overseas without a declaration of war Create a time line indicating the year and the reason for these military involvements. You want to develop a presentation that really holds your classmates attention. Learning the Skill Most presentations are more dynamic if they include diagrams, photographs, videos, or sound recordings. Equipment you may have at home, plus classroom or library resources, can help you develop interesting multimedia presentations. A multimedia presentation involves using several types of media. In order to create multimedia presentations on a computer, though, you need to have certain tools. Your computer manual will tell you which tools your computer can support. Use the following questions as a guide when planning your presentation 1. Which kinds of media equipment are available at my school or local library 3. What types of media can I create to enhance my presentation 4. List three or four major ideas you would like to cover. 177 172179 CH06S3860053 12104 247 AM Page 178 C h a p t e r 6 C h a p t e r 6 Assessment and Activities 1. Powers not specified in the Constitution 2. Compels a witness to appear 4. Refusing to spend funds 5. Reviewing Key Terms Match each of the descriptions below with the term it describes. Not every term will have a description. How are expressed powers and implied powers related 2. Why has the power to regulate interstate commerce become such an important power of Congress 3. 4. What are three methods that Congress uses to oversee the executive branch 5. Identify three powers that Congress and the president share. 6. What are the main causes of conflict between the president and Congress 7. Constitutional Interpretations Explain how the Constitutions commerce clause has helped African Americans obtain equal rights. 2. Checks and Balances What arguments might be made to support a legislative veto power for Congress Critical Thinking 1. Making Generalizations On what basis might the writers of the Constitution have decided which powers should go only to Congress and which powers Congress should share with the president 2. Understanding Cause and Effect In a graphic organizer like the one below, indicate how the power struggle between the president and Congress strengthens or weakens the government. This law is known as the War Powers Act. 3. The President in every possible instance shall consult with Congress before introducing United States Armed Forces into hostilities or into situation where imminent involvement in hostilities is clearly indicated by the circumstances, and after every such introduction shall consult regularly with the Congress until United States Armed Forces are no longer engaged in hostilities or have been removed from such situations. 1. How is the 1973 War Powers Act a check on presidential power 2. Choose one of the topics and create a presentation using at least three types of media to teach the topic to your class. Half empty due to congressional inaction and half full due to the tireless efforts of the President. 1. What is happening in this cartoon 2. 3. Find out about an important issue in your state that has been reflected in a bill debated in Congress. Find out how your senators and representatives stand on the issue and how they voted on the bill. Did you agree or disagree with the senators or representatives position on the bill Write an opinion paper supporting or criticizing your lawmakers position.
