S e c t i o n 1 S e c t i o n 1 How a Bill Becomes a Law In 1957 the Civil Rights Bill was one of many Readers Guide bills introduced in Congress. Unlike a majority of the bills introduced that year, and against the backdrop of a lengthy filibuster, it passed. During each 2year term of Congress, thousands of bills are introduced. The president, federal agencies, labor unions, business groups, and individual citizens all look to Congress to pass laws favorable to their various interests. Of the thousands of bills introduced in each session, only a few hundred become laws. Most die in Congress, and some are vetoed by the president. In this section you will find out how the law making process actually works. First you will look at the different forms new legislation may take. Then you will learn about the steps a bill must go through in order to become a law. Lately, however, their numbers have declined. On the other hand, public bills deal with general matters and apply to the entire nation. They are often controversial. Major public bills usually receive significant media coverage. Major public bills ac count for about 30 percent of the bills passed in each term of Congress. They may be debated for months before they become law. Joint resolutions may correct an error in an earlier law, for example, or appropriate money for a special purpose. Concurrent Resolutions Another type of resolution is a concurrent resolution. Concurrent resolutions cover matters requiring the action of the House and Senate, but on which a law is not needed. Both houses of Congress must pass concurrent resolutions. Riders Bills and resolutions usually deal with only one subject, such as civil rights or veterans benefits. Sometimes, however, a rider is attached to a bill. A rider is a provision on a subject other than the one covered in the bill. Lawmakers attach riders to bills that are likely to pass, although presidents have sometimes vetoed such bills because of a rider they did not like. Such a bill resembles a Christmas tree loaded with ornaments. Christmas tree bills sometimes pass because of the essential nature of the underlying bill. Why So Few Bills Become Laws Less than 10 percent of all bills introduced in Congress be come public laws. Why so few One reason is that the lawmaking process itself is very long and complicated. If you see a need for a law, you can write a bill and ask a representative or senator to introduce it for consideration. A sponsor will work to put your bill in the prop er form for introduction. The sponsor may also make changes in your bills content to increase its chances for passage. You may also contact other members of Congress to request their support for your legislation. Brainstorm to discover a problem that might be solved by national legislation and write a description of it. 180188 CH07S1860053 12104 249 AM Page 183 study found that more than 100 specific steps may be involved in passing a law. Thus, at many points in the lawmaking process a bill can be delayed, killed, or changed. This process has two important implications. First, it means that groups that op pose a bill have an advantage over those that sup port it. Opponents can amend the bill or kill it at many steps along the way. Second, because the lawmaking process has so many steps, sponsors of a bill must be willing to bar gain and compromise with lawmakers and interest groups. Compromise is the only way to get support to move a bill from one step to the next. Without strong support, most major bills have little chance of becoming law. Another reason so few bills become law is that lawmakers sometimes introduce bills they know have no chance of ever becoming law. Members of Congress may introduce such bills to go on record in support of an idea or policy or simply to attract the attention of the news media. Members may also want to satisfy an important group from their state or district. Introducing a bill can help lawmakers avoid criticism at reelection time. When the bill does not move forward, they can blame a committee or other lawmakers. Introducing a Bill The Constitution sets forth only a few of the many steps a bill must go through to be come law. The remaining steps have developed as Congress has grown in size and complexity and the number of bills has increased. The ideas for new bills come from private citizens, interest groups, the president, or officials in the executive branch. Critical Thinking Approximately 5 percent of all measures introduced in Congress become policy. If they do not think a bill should move ahead, other lawmakers will usually agree with them. Time is also a serious factor. Lawmakers have heavy workloads and must depend on the judgment of their peers. During a hearing, the committee listens to testimony from witnesses who may include experts on the subject of the bill, government officials, or representatives of interest groups concerned with the bill. Hearings are supposed to be an opportunity for Congress to gather information on the bill. Most detailed information about the bill, however, comes from research done by the committee staff. Skillful chairpersons may use hearings to influence public opinion for or against a bill or to test the political acceptability of a bill. Hearings can also help focus public attention on a problem or give interest groups a chance to present their opinions. In addition, hearings are often the best point in the lawmaking process to influence a bill. It is during hearings that letters, telegrams, and emails from interested citizens can have their greatest impact on a bill. Committees may also broadcast hearings over the Internet and allow visitors to email questions to committee members. Committees also use their Web home pages to make committee reports, documents, and other information available to Web users. In this type of session, committee members go through the bill section by section, making any changes they think the bill needs. A majority vote of the committee is required for all changes that are made to the bill. Rather, whips are leaders who make sure party members vote along with the rest of the party on bills. The term was originally used in the British House of Commons. Only a member of Congress, however, can introduce a bill in either house of Congress. To introduce a bill in the Senate, the presiding officer must first recognize the senator who then formally presents the bill. Bills introduced in the House and Senate are printed and distributed to lawmakers. In the House, the first bill is H.R.1, the second bill is H.R.2, and so on. This process is the first reading of the bill. Committee chairpersons may send the bill to a subcommittee. To reject a bill, committee members can ignore it and simply let it die, a process called pigeonholing, or they can kill the bill by a majority vote. When accepting a bill, a committee can first completely rewrite it, make changes, or recommend that it be adopted as is before sending it back to the House or Senate for further action. Bill given HR number. 2.2. 1.1. 2.2. 3.3. 4.4. Refer red to House standing committee. Refer red to House subcommittee. Rules Committee sets rules for debate and amendments. 1.1. Bill given S number. 2.2. 1.1. Referred to Senate standing committee. 2.2. Referred to Senate subcommittee. 3.3. Committee Action Bill is placed on committee calendar. Bill sent to subcommittee for hearings and revisions. Standing committee may recommend passage or kill the bill. Floor Action 1.1. 2.2. House debates, votes on passage. Bill passes goes to Senate for approval. 2.2. 1.1. Senate debates, votes on passage. Bill passes goes to House for approval. House votes on compromise bill. Senate votes on compromise bill. OR President vetoes bill. If either fails to override, the bill dies. If Congress adjourns before the 10 days (Sundays excluded), then the bill does not become law. Critical Thinking At what point in Congress is a bill most closely examined 185 180188 CH07S1860053 12104 250 AM Page 186 Voting Electronically Analyzing Votes The electronic voting system in the House displays each representatives name and vote on the wall of the chamber. Representatives insert a plastic card in a box fastened to the chairs to vote yea, nay, or present. When do you think a representative would vote present Reporting a Bill When all the changes have been made, the committee votes either to kill the bill or to report it. To report the bill means to send it to the House or Senate for action. Along with the revised bill, the committee will send to the House or Senate a written report the committee staff has prepared. This report is important. It explains the committees actions, describes the bill, lists the major changes the committee has made, and gives opinions on the bill. The report is often the only document available to lawmakers or their staffs as they decide how to vote on a bill. Why would a committee report a bill but not recommend pas sage This happens extremely rarely. Floor Action The next important step in the lawmaking process is the debate on the bill on the floor of the House and Senate. Voting on the bill fol lows the debate. As you may recall, both houses have special procedures to schedule bills for floor action. The pros and cons of the bill have been argued in the committee hearings and are already well known to those with a real interest in the bill. During the floor debate, the bill receives its second reading. A clerk reads the bill section by section. After each section is read, amendments may be offered. Amendments range from the introduction of major changes in a bill to the correction of typo graphical errors. Opponents of the bill sometimes propose amendments to slow its progress through Congress or even to kill it. One strategy opponents use is to load it down with so many objectionable amendments that it loses support and dies. In both the House and the Senate amendments are added to a bill only if a majority of the members present approves them. Voting on Bills After the floor debate, the bill, including any proposed changes, is ready for a 180188 CH07S1860053 12104 250 AM Page 187 Seal of the U.S. Congress vote. A quorum, or a majority, of the members must be present. The House or Senate now receives the third reading of the bill. A vote on the bill is then taken. Passage of a bill requires a majority vote of all the members present. House and Senate members can vote on a bill in one of three ways. The second way of voting is by a standing vote, or division vote, in which those in favor of the bill stand and are counted and then those opposed stand and are counted. The House also uses a fourth method called a record ed vote, in which members votes are recorded electronically and displayed on panels in the House chamber. Final Steps in Passing Bills To become law a bill must pass both houses of Congress in identical form. A bill passed in the House of Representatives often differs at first from a Senates bill on the same subject. Conference Committee Action If one house will not accept the version of a bill the other house has passed, a conference committee must work out differences between the versions. They usually come from the House and Senate committee members that handled the bill originally. The conferees work out the differences between the two bills by arranging compromises. A majority of the members of the conference committee from each house drafts the final bill, called a conference re port. Once accepted, this bill can be submitted to each house of Congress for final action. Presidential Action on Bills Article I1 of the Constitution states that Every Bill which shall have passed the House of Representatives and the Senate, shall, before it be comes a Law, be presented to the President of the United States . The president may sign the bill, and it w ill become law. The president may also keep the bill for 10 days without signing it. If Congress is in session, the bill will become law without the presidents signature. Most of the time, however, presidents sign the bills that Congress sends them. Vetoing Bills The president can also reject a bill with a veto. In a veto the president refuses to sign the bill and returns it to the house of Congress in which it originated, along with reasons for the veto. The president may also kill a bill passed during the last 10 days Congress is in session by refusing to act on it. This veto is called a pocket veto. If this happens, the bill becomes law. The Constitution, pages 774 799. Another section of this database provides the full text of the Congressional Record, committee reports, summaries of bills and updates on their status as they move through the legislative process, and the history of bills. Bills do not appear in the database until they are published in an official version by the Government Printing Office. As a result, drafts of bills, committee recommendations, and the chair mans mark, the version of a bill as it goes through a markup session, are not available. New York challenged the veto because it reduced Medicaid funding for New York state hospitals. Idaho farmers also challenged the veto of a tax break in the Taxpayer Relief Act. The Supreme Court ruled in Clinton v. City of New York (1998) that the Line Item Veto Act was unconstitutional. Registering Laws After a bill becomes law, it is registered with the National Archives and Records Service. The law is labeled as a public or private law and assigned a number that identifies the Congress that passed the bill and the number of the law for that term. For example, Public Law 187 under the 105th Congress is registered as PL105187. This Checking for Understanding 1. Main Idea Create a flow chart to analyze the major stages by which a bill becomes a law. Drawing Conclusions Is it possible for all members of Congress to keep abreast of all bills under consideration Support your answer. 2. Define private bill, public bill, simple resolution, rider, hearing, veto, pocket veto. 3. 4. Why do so few bills actually become laws Political Processes Imagine that you are asked to help younger children learn how laws are made in the United States. The government could not operate successfully without money to carry out its many programs and services. Almost all important work on tax laws occurs in the House Ways and Means Commit tee. The Ways and Means Committee decides whether to go along with presidential requests for tax cuts or increases. It also makes the numerous rules and regulations that determine who w ill pay how much tax. Some of these rulings are very simple while others are more complex. It also decides what kind of tax benefit businesses can claim for building new factories. This rule meant that only members of the Ways and Means Committee could have a direct hand in writing a tax bill. Other House members accepted this closed rule procedure on tax bills for several reasons. Floor amendments, they argued, might upset the fair and balanced legislation recommended by the committee. In the 1970s House members revolted against the Ways and Means Committee. In 1973 the House allowed members to amend a tax bill on the floor. In the Senate no closed rule exists, and tax bills often do become collections of amendments. Many tax bills are amended so often on the Senate floor they become Christmas tree bills similar to appropriations bills that include many riders. The Senates Role in Tax Legislation All tax bills start in the House. Article I, Section 7,1 of the Constitution, however, says, The Senate may propose amendments . Because of this pro vision, the Senate often tries to change tax bills the House has passed. As a result, many people view the Senate as the place where interest groups can get House tax provisions they do not like changed or eliminated. Like the House Ways and Means Committee, the Senate Finance Committee is powerful. Although the Senate Finance Committee has subcommittees, the full committee does most of the work on tax bills. As a result, the chairperson of the Finance Committee is an extremely important figure. See the following footnoted materials in the Reference Handbook 1. The Constitution, pages 774 799. In Article I, Section 9, the Constitution states, No money shall be drawn from the Treasury, but in consequence of except by appropriations made by law. 1 Thus, Congress must pass laws to appropriate money for the federal government. Suppose the president signs a bill to build recreational facilities in the inner cities. See the following footnoted materials in the Reference Handbook 1. The Constitution, pages 774 799. This first step in the legislation is an authorization bill. For example, one provision of this law limits the amount of money that can be spent on the program to 30 million a year. Each year the president presents his budget to Congress. There the appropriations committees create their own appropriations bills. In the mid 1930s, President Franklin D. Roosevelt convinced Congress to appropriate funds to a relief program for the unemployed. The Appropriations Committees The House and Senate appropriations committees and their subcommittees handle appropriations bills. During the budget hearings, these officials explain why they need the money they have requested. Each year agency officials must return to Congress to request the money they need to operate in the coming year. In this way law makers have a chance to become familiar with the federal agencies and their programs. In addition, powerful interest groups try hard to influence Congress and the appropriations sub committees to give these agencies all the money they request. Uncontrollable Expenditures The House and Senate appropriations committees, however, do not have a voice in all the current spending of the federal government. Some of these expenditures are known as entitlements because they are social programs that continue from one year to the next. Checking for Understanding 1. Main Idea Using a graphic organizer like the one to the right, show the 2. 2. 3. 4. Synthesizing Information Do you think Congress should have the power both to raise and to spend money Support your answer. Find out what amounts of money the government plans to raise and spend in each category. Create an illustrated report or series of graphs and charts. Binder and Steven S. Smith To analyze the information you encounter, follow these five steps 1. 2. Determine if the information is from a primary or secondary source. 3. Evaluate the reliability of the source. 4. Determine what evidence the author presents. 5. Compare the information with other sources to see if they support or contradict each other. Learning the Skill Thomas Jefferson Practicing the Skill Read the excerpt below. It defines the nature of the Senate. Then answer the questions that follow. Why, asked Washington, did you pour that coffee into your saucer To cool it, Jefferson replied. Even so, responded Washington, we pour legislation into the senatorial saucer to cool it. That the Senate was intended to be the more deliberative and reasoning of the two chambers is well known. In designing the Senate, the Framers chose institutional George Washington 1. What subject are the authors addressing 2. Is it a primary or secondary source 3. Do you think the source is reliable Why 4. What evidence do the authors offer to support their viewpoint 5. Prepare a short report analyzing one of the letters. They must also decide how to vote on controversial issues and when to make speeches explaining their views. In a single session, members may cast votes on a thousand issues. Who influences the lawmakers Key Terms lobbyist, lobbying Find Out How closely should the votes of members of Congress reflect the opinions of their constituents What factors must a member of Congress weigh when deciding whether to support the views of an interest group or of the president Understanding Concepts Political Processes What specific groups and individuals influence the legislators decisions Influences on Lawmakers A great many factors influence a lawmakers decisions. Sometimes the very nature of the issue determines the factors that w ill influence lawmakers most. For example, on a controversial issue such as the Second Amendment right to own a gun, a lawmaker may pay attention to the voters back home, no matter what his or her own beliefs may be. On issues that have little direct effect on their home states or districts, most lawmakers are likely to rely on their own beliefs or on the advice and opinions of other lawmakers. Congressional staff members also influence lawmakers decisions in Congress. They can do this in several ways. One way is by controlling the information on which lawmakers base their decisions. Voters say they want their lawmakers to follow constituents wishes on the issues and enact laws that reflect their needs and opinions. Most voters, however, do not take the trouble to find out how their senators and representatives cast their votes in Congress. Sometimes voters are not even aware of all the issues lawmakers must decide and vote on. They may demand that the lawmaker explain votes that turned out to be unpopular back home. A legislator running for reelection may call attention to his or her votes on certain measures in order to attract constituents support. What does the cartoonist seem to be saying about who influences a legislators vote As a result, voters who might otherwise not know how the lawmaker voted are told how well he or she paid attention to the folks back home. As a result, lawmakers try to find out what the voters back home are concerned about well before an election. One method is to make frequent trips home to learn the local voters concerns. Senators and representatives make dozens of trips to their home districts each year. These supporters also help lawmakers keep in touch with events back home. The Influence of Parties Almost every member of Congress is either a Republican or a Democrat. In many cases, knowing which political party members of Congress belong to will help predict how they will vote on major issues. Party Voting Both Democrats and Republicans tend to vote with their parties on bills. In the House of Representatives, members vote with their party more than 70 percent of the time. Party voting is much stronger on some issues than on others. On issues relating to government intervention in the economy, party members tend to vote the same way. Party voting is usually weaker on foreign policy issues because the two parties often do not have fixed positions on international questions. The Importance of Parties Republicans or Democrats vote with their parties because members of each party are likely to share the same general beliefs about public policy. In general, Republican members of Congress are likely to support lower taxes, less government spending, local and state rather than federal solutions to problems, and policies that support businesses and corporations and limit government intervention in the economy. Another reason for party voting is that most lawmakers do not have strong opinions about every issue on which they vote. They cannot know enough about all the issues to make informed decisions about every bill. Therefore, they often seek advice on how to vote from fellow party members who know more about an issue than they do. Voting Along Party Lines Political Processes Political parties greatly influence legislators voting decisions. How may congressional party leaders persuade lawmakers to support the party position Messages From Home Lawmakers also pay attention to the messages pouring into their offices every day. Staff members screen the lawmakers mail to learn what issues concern voters the most. Not all messages carry equal weight. Most lawmakers are only interested in messages that come from voters in their district or state or from interest groups of special concern to them. Sending an email to your lawmaker is one of the easiest ways to communicate with him or her. Surveys and Polls Many lawmakers send questionnaires to their constituents asking for their opinions on various issues. As an election draws near, lawmakers w ill often hire professional pollsters to conduct opinion surveys among the voters of their districts. Often, party leaders support the presidents program if the president is a member of the same party. Congressional party leaders such as the Senate majority leader or the Speaker of the House usually use the power of persuasion. These leaders do not expect to get their way all the time. Some presidents work harder than others at gaining sup port in Congress, and some are more successful in getting Congress to pass their programs. In late 1990 and early 1991, for example, President Bush deployed United States troops to Saudi Arabia. More than 6 months of military buildup followed, in which the United States government attempted to force Iraq out of Kuwait. Congress let the president take the lead in responding to Iraq. President Bush took every opportunity to express his views in the press and on television. With growing public support for military action behind the president, Congress voted to approve military action in the Persian Gulf. Presidential influence, in this instance of pol icy making, had tremendous influence. Presidents may also use their powers to influence individual members of Congress. They can give or withhold support of lawmakers. Anthony. Her efforts also took her to Washington, D.C., to see the statue and speak at a Raise the Statue rally. Her campaign did not go unnoticed by national legislators. Anthony 194199 CH07S3860053 12104 252 AM Page 198 Vietnam War. To support his viewpoint, Church showed President Johnson a newspaper column written by journalist Walter Lippmann criticizing the war. All right, Johnson said, the next time you need a dam for Idaho, you go ask Walter Lippmann. Since the early 1900s, many presidents have tried to increase their influence over Congress and the lawmaking process, and they have succeeded. In more recent years Congress has taken steps to limit the presidents influence, letting Congress remain a more autonomous legislative body. The Influence of Interest Groups The representatives of interest groups, called lobbyists, are another important influence on Congress. Lobbyists try to convince members of Congress to support policies favored by the groups they rep resent. Their efforts to persuade officials to support their point of view is called lobbying. In addition, lobbyists work for groups that sometimes form to support or to oppose a specific issue. They visit lawmakers in their offices or in the lobbies of the Capitol and try to persuade them to support their position. They encourage citizens to write to members of Congress on the issues they favor or oppose. Interest groups and their lobbyists also focus their attention on congressional committees. For example, farm groups concentrate their attention on influencing the committees responsible for laws on agriculture. Labor unions focus their effort on committees dealing with labor legislation and the economy. 1. 4. Checking for Understanding 1. Main Idea Using a graphic organizer like the one to the right, identify four ways lawmakers can keep in touch with voters opinions. 2. Define lobbyist, lobbying. 3. 4. On which type of issues do lawmakers tend to pay less attention to voter opinion 5. What influence does the president have on Congress Lawmakers 3. Summarize how the group attempts to influence legislators. The project provided additional justification for another major project, the space shuttle. By late 1996 President Clinton confirmed that the manned mission to Mars project was dead. Instead, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration began preparing a vast armada of robots to send to the red planet. In 1997, the first robot landed on Mars and sent back dramatic images and extensive data. A human mission would have cost 500 billion. Scientists also plan to use the station for biological experiments. U.S. There are risks, however. In 2003, tragedy struck the shuttle Columbia when it blew apart on reentry into the atmosphere, killing all seven crew members. The proposed budget is for 94 billion over a 15year period. Debate Discuss the issue in class. Allow time for two people on either side of the issue to prepare short speeches to present to the class. Then have the class vote and record the results. Discuss the outcome of the vote. Second, they must make sure that their district or state gets its share of federal money for projects such as new post offices, highways, and contracts. These two duties are not new to members of Congress, but in recent years these duties have become increasingly important. As the national government has grown, they have become a time consuming part of the lawmakers job. One House member put it this way, Rightly or wrongly, we have become the link between the frustrated citizen and the very involved federal government in citizens lives . We continually use more and more of our staff time to handle citizens complaints. Typical requests include (1) A soldier would like the Army to move him to a base close to home because his parents are ill. The agency says the veteran failed to fill out and return a certain form. The veteran says he never got the form, but he wants the life insurance. A representative from New York, for example, was asked to fix a speeding ticket. Another member received a call asking what the lawmaker was going to do about the shortage of snow shovels at a local hardware store during a blizzard. In most instances the caseworkers are able to handle the requests for help themselves. Sometimes the problem can be solved with a simple question from a caseworker to the agency involved. At other times, however, the senator or representative may have to get directly involved. Purposes of Casework Why do lawmakers spend so much of their time on casework Law makers are involved in casework because it serves three important purposes. First, casework helps lawmakers get reelected. Lawmakers know that helping voters with problems is part of what they can do for the people in their states or districts. As a result, many lawmakers actually look for casework. Many representatives have vans that drive through their districts as mobile offices to keep watch on problems back home. Third, casework provides a way for the average citizen to cope with the huge national government. Public Works Legislation Every year, through public works bills, Congress appropriates billions of dollars for a variety of local projects. Such government projects can bring jobs and money into a state or district. The idea is that a member of Congress has dipped into the pork barrel (the federal treasury) and pulled out a piece of fat (a federal project for his or her district). Sometimes such legislation draws criticism. These contracts are a vital source of money and jobs and can radically affect the economy of a state. Every year federal agencies such as the Department of Defense spend billions of dollars to carry out hundreds of government projects and programs. For example, when the Air Force decided to locate a new project at one of its bases in Utah, almost 1,000 jobs and millions of dollars came into the state. Lawmakers often compete for such valuable 200209 CH07S4860053 12104 256 AM Page 203 Distributing the Pork federal grants or contracts. Lawmakers, however, may try to influence agency decisions in several ways. They may pressure agency officials to give a favorable hearing to their states re quests. Many lawmakers assign one or more of their staff members to act as specialists in contracts and grants. They w ill help Congressional Politics This 1963 cartoon illustrates the pressures for a lawmaker to bring home the bacon to his or her congressional district. What kinds of projects receive pork handouts from Congress constituents apply for contracts and grants. The lawmakers job is to make sure federal grants and contracts keep coming into their state or district. GrantsContracts Pork 2. 3. Identify caseworker, public works bill. 4. Why do lawmakers get involved in casework 5. List three ways lawmakers bring federal projects to their states. 6. Which branch of government awards federal grants and contracts Critical Thinking 7. Drawing Conclusions Why do you think the size of the lawmakers staff has increased in recent years Federalism Look through several editions of your local paper to find examples of federal money spent in your state or community. Senate. And then, once he had bullied and cajoled and converted his Senate colleagues, he would have to do something even harder. He would have to trust them. Bush in March 2002. In this activity, you will take a bill through the process to create your own law. The activity will help you understand the lawmaking process in both houses of Congress and demonstrate the role that compromise plays in getting a bill passed. You may want to reread pages 181188 before you begin. The leader of each house should appoint each member to one of three committees. The leader will give each committee one bill for which it will be responsible. Each committee should choose a recorder to keep track of the progress and changes made to the bill. Members of each committee should also select a chairperson for their committee. The chairperson will be responsible for organizing the agenda for the committee meeting, assigning tasks, presiding over the meeting, and conducting votes. If available, you can also use blank transparencies and an overhead projector. These proposals might deal with the arrangement of seating, the use of the bulletin board, orderliness of materials on shelves, room decorations, and so on. Have the recorders from the House and the Senate write down each suggestion in the form of a bill for that house. Number the bills appropriately as explained in the text on page 184. Moving to Committee Groups 2 and 3 Senators and representatives should adjourn to separate areas of the class room. The recorders should then read the text of their three bills out loud. The members of all three committees should now reconvene as the Senate or House to hold debate on each bill. The leader of each house should preside over the debate, allowing one person at a time to speak. Changes (amendments) can still be made to the bills if a majority of members vote to do so. Calling Witnesses Groups 1, 2, and 3 The chairperson for each committee should call for a hearing and invite one witness to present his or her opinion on the bill. Group 1 Before the hearing, the witnesses should meet to divide up the bills being introduced. S E V I T A T N E S E R P E R F O E S U O H Y S E T R U O C 206 A bill must be dropped into the House hopper to be considered for legislative action. Each house should take a vote of its members to determine if the bill will pass or be defeated in its amended form. A roll call of each persons vote should be recorded. Presenting the Bill Each bill that passes through both houses should be for warded to the president (teacher) for action in written form. If the president vetoes a bill, the House and Senate may vote again to override the veto, or let the veto stand. On an overhead projector, display the original form of each bill in each house, along with the final versions. You may want to hold a class discussion on the following questions. Questions for Discussion 1. What improvements were made by the changes in each bill 2. If any of the bills were killed in committee, why did this happen 3. What disagreements in your committee were resolved by compromise 4. At what point in the lawmaking process is a bill most likely to be changed the most 6. C h a p t e r 7 C h a p t e r 7 Assessment and Activities 5. 6. Witnesses usually offer testimony in a committee _____ regarding a specific bill. 7. Under a _____, House members were forbid den to offer amendments to tax bills from the floor. 8. _____ is when Congress passes laws to appropriate money for local federal projects. 9. The president gives a _____ by not signing a bill during the last 10 days Congress is in session. 10. _____ set up federal programs and specify how much money may be appropriated for those programs. Recalling Facts 1. Describe the two types of bills that may be introduced and three types of resolutions that may be passed in Congress. 2. What are four actions a president may take on a bill 3. What role does the House Ways and Means Committee play in tax legislation 4. What factors influence lawmakers when they consider legislation 5. A _____ is money that citizens and businesses pay to support the government. 2. _____ is a congressional task that involves helping constituents with problems. 3. A _____ is an often controversial provision tacked on to a bill pertaining to a different subject. 4. Interest on the national debt and Social Security payments are examples of _____. Making Inferences Use the graphic organizer below to show three characteristics that help a bill make its way through the lawmaking process. C h a p t e r 7 C h a p t e r 7 Interpreting Political Cartoons Activity Someone called from a Political Inaction Committee to speak to you on behalf of apathetic voters. He said he might call back. 1. What is the Political Inaction Committee referred to in the cartoon 2. How is the Political Inaction Committee different from other interest groups 3. Why is this situation unrealistic 2. Drawing Conclusions Why is Congress reluctant to appropriate the full amount of money an agency requests Analyzing Primary Sources During the 1930s, President Franklin D. In the fireside chat excerpted below, Roosevelt explains why the New Deal did not take power away from Congress. Read the excerpt and answer the questions that follow. A prompt program applied as quickly as possible seemed to me not only justified but imperative to our national security . The members of Congress realized that the methods of normal times had to be replaced in the emergency by measures which were suited to the serious and pressing requirements of the moment. There was no actual surrender of power, Congress still retained its constitutional authority . The function of Congress is to decide what has to be done and to select the appropriate agency to carry out its will . The only thing that has been happening has been to designate the President as the agency to carry out certain of the purposes of the Congress. 1. Why do you think the president was careful to specify that Congress had not surrendered its constitutional power Participating in Local Government Obtain a copy of a bill being considered in your state from your state representative or senator. Decide what changes you would suggest in the bill. Forward these suggestions to your representative or senator and ask for a response.
