44360 62682
They must also decide how to vote on controversial issues and when to make speeches explaining their views. In a single session, members may cast votes on a thousand issues. Who influences the lawmakers Key Terms lobbyist, lobbying Find Out How closely should the votes of members of Congress reflect the opinions of their constituents What factors must a member of Congress weigh when deciding whether to support the views of an interest group or of the president Understanding Concepts Political Processes What specific groups and individuals influence the legislators decisions Influences on Lawmakers A great many factors influence a lawmakers decisions. Sometimes the very nature of the issue determines the factors that w ill influence lawmakers most. For example, on a controversial issue such as the Second Amendment right to own a gun, a lawmaker may pay attention to the voters back home, no matter what his or her own beliefs may be. On issues that have little direct effect on their home states or districts, most lawmakers are likely to rely on their own beliefs or on the advice and opinions of other lawmakers. Congressional staff members also influence lawmakers decisions in Congress. They can do this in several ways. One way is by controlling the information on which lawmakers base their decisions. Voters say they want their lawmakers to follow constituents wishes on the issues and enact laws that reflect their needs and opinions. Most voters, however, do not take the trouble to find out how their senators and representatives cast their votes in Congress. Sometimes voters are not even aware of all the issues lawmakers must decide and vote on. They may demand that the lawmaker explain votes that turned out to be unpopular back home. A legislator running for reelection may call attention to his or her votes on certain measures in order to attract constituents support. What does the cartoonist seem to be saying about who influences a legislators vote As a result, voters who might otherwise not know how the lawmaker voted are told how well he or she paid attention to the folks back home. As a result, lawmakers try to find out what the voters back home are concerned about well before an election. One method is to make frequent trips home to learn the local voters concerns. Senators and representatives make dozens of trips to their home districts each year. These supporters also help lawmakers keep in touch with events back home. The Influence of Parties Almost every member of Congress is either a Republican or a Democrat. In many cases, knowing which political party members of Congress belong to will help predict how they will vote on major issues. Party Voting Both Democrats and Republicans tend to vote with their parties on bills. In the House of Representatives, members vote with their party more than 70 percent of the time. Party voting is much stronger on some issues than on others. On issues relating to government intervention in the economy, party members tend to vote the same way. Party voting is usually weaker on foreign policy issues because the two parties often do not have fixed positions on international questions. The Importance of Parties Republicans or Democrats vote with their parties because members of each party are likely to share the same general beliefs about public policy. In general, Republican members of Congress are likely to support lower taxes, less government spending, local and state rather than federal solutions to problems, and policies that support businesses and corporations and limit government intervention in the economy. Another reason for party voting is that most lawmakers do not have strong opinions about every issue on which they vote. They cannot know enough about all the issues to make informed decisions about every bill. Therefore, they often seek advice on how to vote from fellow party members who know more about an issue than they do. Voting Along Party Lines Political Processes Political parties greatly influence legislators voting decisions. How may congressional party leaders persuade lawmakers to support the party position Messages From Home Lawmakers also pay attention to the messages pouring into their offices every day. Staff members screen the lawmakers mail to learn what issues concern voters the most. Not all messages carry equal weight. Most lawmakers are only interested in messages that come from voters in their district or state or from interest groups of special concern to them. Sending an email to your lawmaker is one of the easiest ways to communicate with him or her. Surveys and Polls Many lawmakers send questionnaires to their constituents asking for their opinions on various issues. As an election draws near, lawmakers w ill often hire professional pollsters to conduct opinion surveys among the voters of their districts. Often, party leaders support the presidents program if the president is a member of the same party. Congressional party leaders such as the Senate majority leader or the Speaker of the House usually use the power of persuasion. These leaders do not expect to get their way all the time. Some presidents work harder than others at gaining sup port in Congress, and some are more successful in getting Congress to pass their programs. In late 1990 and early 1991, for example, President Bush deployed United States troops to Saudi Arabia. More than 6 months of military buildup followed, in which the United States government attempted to force Iraq out of Kuwait. Congress let the president take the lead in responding to Iraq. President Bush took every opportunity to express his views in the press and on television. With growing public support for military action behind the president, Congress voted to approve military action in the Persian Gulf. Presidential influence, in this instance of pol icy making, had tremendous influence. Presidents may also use their powers to influence individual members of Congress. They can give or withhold support of lawmakers. Anthony. Her efforts also took her to Washington, D.C., to see the statue and speak at a Raise the Statue rally. Her campaign did not go unnoticed by national legislators. Anthony 194199 CH07S3860053 12104 252 AM Page 198 Vietnam War. To support his viewpoint, Church showed President Johnson a newspaper column written by journalist Walter Lippmann criticizing the war. All right, Johnson said, the next time you need a dam for Idaho, you go ask Walter Lippmann. Since the early 1900s, many presidents have tried to increase their influence over Congress and the lawmaking process, and they have succeeded. In more recent years Congress has taken steps to limit the presidents influence, letting Congress remain a more autonomous legislative body. The Influence of Interest Groups The representatives of interest groups, called lobbyists, are another important influence on Congress. Lobbyists try to convince members of Congress to support policies favored by the groups they rep resent. Their efforts to persuade officials to support their point of view is called lobbying. In addition, lobbyists work for groups that sometimes form to support or to oppose a specific issue. They visit lawmakers in their offices or in the lobbies of the Capitol and try to persuade them to support their position. They encourage citizens to write to members of Congress on the issues they favor or oppose. Interest groups and their lobbyists also focus their attention on congressional committees. For example, farm groups concentrate their attention on influencing the committees responsible for laws on agriculture. Labor unions focus their effort on committees dealing with labor legislation and the economy.
