66481 79065
Second, they must make sure that their district or state gets its share of federal money for projects such as new post offices, highways, and contracts. These two duties are not new to members of Congress, but in recent years these duties have become increasingly important. As the national government has grown, they have become a time consuming part of the lawmakers job. One House member put it this way, Rightly or wrongly, we have become the link between the frustrated citizen and the very involved federal government in citizens lives . We continually use more and more of our staff time to handle citizens complaints. Typical requests include (1) A soldier would like the Army to move him to a base close to home because his parents are ill. The agency says the veteran failed to fill out and return a certain form. The veteran says he never got the form, but he wants the life insurance. A representative from New York, for example, was asked to fix a speeding ticket. Another member received a call asking what the lawmaker was going to do about the shortage of snow shovels at a local hardware store during a blizzard. In most instances the caseworkers are able to handle the requests for help themselves. Sometimes the problem can be solved with a simple question from a caseworker to the agency involved. At other times, however, the senator or representative may have to get directly involved. Purposes of Casework Why do lawmakers spend so much of their time on casework Law makers are involved in casework because it serves three important purposes. First, casework helps lawmakers get reelected. Lawmakers know that helping voters with problems is part of what they can do for the people in their states or districts. As a result, many lawmakers actually look for casework. Many representatives have vans that drive through their districts as mobile offices to keep watch on problems back home. Third, casework provides a way for the average citizen to cope with the huge national government. Public Works Legislation Every year, through public works bills, Congress appropriates billions of dollars for a variety of local projects. Such government projects can bring jobs and money into a state or district. The idea is that a member of Congress has dipped into the pork barrel (the federal treasury) and pulled out a piece of fat (a federal project for his or her district). Sometimes such legislation draws criticism. These contracts are a vital source of money and jobs and can radically affect the economy of a state. Every year federal agencies such as the Department of Defense spend billions of dollars to carry out hundreds of government projects and programs. For example, when the Air Force decided to locate a new project at one of its bases in Utah, almost 1,000 jobs and millions of dollars came into the state. Lawmakers often compete for such valuable 200209 CH07S4860053 12104 256 AM Page 203 Distributing the Pork federal grants or contracts. Lawmakers, however, may try to influence agency decisions in several ways. They may pressure agency officials to give a favorable hearing to their states re quests. Many lawmakers assign one or more of their staff members to act as specialists in contracts and grants. They w ill help Congressional Politics This 1963 cartoon illustrates the pressures for a lawmaker to bring home the bacon to his or her congressional district. What kinds of projects receive pork handouts from Congress constituents apply for contracts and grants. The lawmakers job is to make sure federal grants and contracts keep coming into their state or district.
