034-041 CH02S1-860053  12/1/04  1:27 AM  Page 34

Your Heritage When you go to sleep tonight,
you may take for granted that government officials
will not break in to perform an unreasonable search
of your house. The security provided by government
and the protection from government are a heritage
of the period you will study in Chapter 2.

To learn more about the federal 
government and its origins, view the
Democracy in Action Chapter 2 video lesson: 
The Creation of the Federal Government

★       ★       ★       ★       ★       ★       ★       ★       ★       ★

GOVERNMENT

Chapter Overview Visit the United States
Government: Democracy  in Action Web site
at gov.glencoe.com and click on Chapter
2—Overview to preview chapter  information.

34

034-041 CH02S1-860053  12/1/04  1:27 AM  Page 35

S e c t i o n   1
S e c t i o n   1
The Colonial Period
Every year thousands of foreign and Amer-
Reader’s Guide
ican  tourists  flock  to Virginia  to  visit  the
remains  of Jamestown, the  first  perma-
nent English settlement in North America.
Crumbling  foundations  and  the  ruins  of the  old
church  tower  mark  the  site  of
the  original
Jamestown, founded  in  1607. The  decaying  brick
and mortar offer a  striking contrast  to  the endur-
ing  principles  of self-government  inherited  from
the  English  colonists. This  legacy  of self-govern-
ment enables Americans today to voice their opin-
ions  w ithout  fear  of reprisal, to  choose  their
leaders, and  to  take  an  active  role  in  shaping  the
nation and communities in which they live.

Key Terms
limited government, representative government,
separation of powers
Find Out 
■ What events of the early American colonial expe-
rience led colonists to believe they would have
representative government?
■ In what ways were the American colonies demo-
cratic? In what ways were they not democratic? 
Understanding Concepts
Growth of Democracy What elements of the 
English political heritage helped develop represen-
tative governments in the American colonies? 

Law   and  Order
JAMESTOWN ,  V IRG IN IA ,   1 6 1 1
N ew  gove rno r  S i r  Thom a s
D a l e , r e c e n t l y   a r r i v e d
a n -
h a s  
f r om   E n g l a n d ,
n o u n c e d   a   s w e e p i n g   s e t   o f
l aw s  f o r  t h e  co l o ny. C a l l e d  t h e
“ L aw s   D i v i n e , Mo r a l l , a n d
M a r t i a l ,” t h e   n e w   r u l e s   a r e
l i f e   h e r e .
l i k e l y   t o   c h a n g e  
E a ch  r e s i d e n t  w i l l  b e  a s s i g n e d
S i r   T h om a s   D a l e
s p e c i f i c   d u t i e s . Re f u s a l   to   co -
o p e r a t e   w i l l   b e   d e a l t   w i t h   s e -
ve r e l y. F i r s t  o f f en d e r s  w i l l  b e   f o r c e d   to   l i e  d ow n  w i t h
n e c k   a n d   h e e l s   to g e t h e r   f o r   o n e   n i g h t . Re p e a t   v i o l a -
t o r s   w i l l   b e   w h i p p e d . A   t h i r d   o f f e n s e   w i l l   r e s u l t   i n
e n s l a v em e n t   a b o a r d   a   c o nv i c t   s h i p   f o r   a   p e r i o d   o f
o n e   y e a r. Au t h o r i t i e s   e x p e c t   t h e   n ew   l aw s   t o   b r i n g
o rd e r   an d   p ro s p e r i t y   to   t h e   co l ony.

An English Political Heritage
During  the  1600s  people  from  many  re-
gions, such  as  Spain, France, Germany,
Sweden, and West Africa, came to North America.
Most  colonists, however, came  from  England. It
was the English who established and governed the
original thirteen colonies along the Atlantic coast.
The  Eng lish  colonists  brought  ideas  about
government that had been developing in England
for  centuries. They  also  noticed  that  some  of
these ideas were embodied by existing governing
systems  in North America, such  as  the  Iroquois
League, a union of five Native American groups.
At the heart of the English system were two prin-
ciples of government. These principles—limited
government  and  representative  government—
greatly  influenced  the  development  of the 
United States.
Limited  Government By  the  time  the  first
colonists  reached North America, the  idea  that
government was not  all-powerful had  become
an accepted part of the English system. The idea
first  appeared  in  the Magna Carta,1 or Great

See the following footnoted materials in the Reference Handbook:
1. Magna Carta, page 802. 

▲

The Signing of the Declaration of Independence (detail) by John Trumbull, 1824

35

034-041 CH02S1-860053  12/1/04  1:28 AM  Page 36

Charter, that King John was  forced to sign  in 1215.
The Magna Carta provided the basis for the principle
of limited government, in which  the power of the
monarch, or government, was  limited, not absolute.
Later  generations  interpreted  this  document  as
providing protection against unjust punishment and
the loss of life, liberty, and property except according
to law. The charter also stated that certain taxes could
not be levied without popular consent.
The rights in the Magna Carta originally applied
only  to  the nobility. Over  time, however, opponents
of absolute  monarchy  used  the  precedent  set  by
this document  to gain more political  liberties and
support for the idea of constitutional government.
Petition  of  Right While  Parliament  main-
tained some influence, strong monarchs dominat-
ed  England  for  centuries. In  1625 Charles  I  took
the throne. He dissolved Parliament, lodged troops
in  private  homes, and  placed  some  areas  under
martial  law. When  he  called  Parliament  back  into
session in 1628, the representatives forced the king
to sign the Petition of Right, severely  limiting the
king’s  power. No  longer  could  the  Eng lish
monarch  collect  taxes  w ithout  Parliament’s 

consent, imprison  people  w ithout  just  cause,
house  troops  in  private  homes w ithout  the  per-
mission of the owner, or declare martial law unless
the country was at war.
English Bill of Rights In 1688 Parliament re-
moved  James  II  from  the  throne  and  crowned
William III and  Mary II. This peaceful transfer of
power was called the Glorious Revolution. William
and Mary  swore  an  oath  to  govern  Eng land  ac-
cording to the “statutes in Parliament agreed upon,
and the laws and customs of the same.” Parliament
also passed the English Bill of Rights, a document
that would  later  be  very  important  to  the Ameri-
can colonies.
The  English Bill  of Rights  set  clear  limits  on
what  a  ruler  could  and  could  not  do. It  applied
to the  American  colonists—who  were  English
subjects—as  well  as  to  the  people  in  England.
Incorporating elements from the Magna Carta, the
key  ideas  of the  English  Bill  of Rights  included:
(1) Monarchs do not have absolute authority. They
rule with  the  consent  of the  people’s  representa-
tives  in  Parliament. (2) The monarch must  have 
Parliament’s consent to suspend laws, levy taxes, or

Being Represented

articipating
articipating
I N   G O V E R N M E N T
I N   G O V E R N M E N T
One reason for the War for In-
dependence was that Britain
was depriving the colonists,
who were British citizens, of repre-
sentation. By being represented in
some of the various organizations
in your community, you can provide
input to these organizations from a
student’s perspective. Organiza-
tions such as crime patrols, com-
munity development groups, youth
associations, environmental
groups, and volunteer organizations
hold regular committee meetings
that make decisions that affect
you. What can you do to be repre-
sented in these organizations? 

Activity
1. Call your chamber of commerce
or local government offices and
ask for a listing of such organiza-
tions mentioned. 
2. After you have decided on an
issue and a committee that in-
terests you, ask to become a
part of the committee. You are
more likely to serve as a student
adviser than as a voting mem-
ber. As an adviser, though, you
will still have the ability to influ-
ence decisions and to provide
ideas for the future plans of the
committee.
3. Attend meetings and ask ques-
tions when there are issues that
you do not understand. Provide
suggestions for getting things
done.

Participating in their 
community

36 CHAPTER 2: ORIGINS OF AMERICAN GOVERNMENT

034-041 CH02S1-860053  12/1/04  1:28 AM  Page 37

Beginnings of Representative Government  in America

maintain  an  army. (3) The monarch
cannot  interfere with  parliamentary
elections and debates. (4) The people
have  a  right  to  petition  the  govern-
ment  and  to  have  a  fair  and  speedy
trial by a  jury of their peers. (5) The
people should not be subject to cruel
and  unusual  punishments  or  to  ex-
cessive fines and bail.
The  colonists  in North America
shared a belief in these rights with the
people  of England. In  fact, a major
cause  of the  American  Revolution
was  that  the  colonists  felt  they were
being deprived of these basic rights.
Representative  Government
The  colonists  had  a  firm  belief in
representative  government, a  gov-
ernment  in which  people  elect  dele-
gates  to  make  laws  and  conduct
government. The English Parliament
was  a  representative  assembly  with
the  power  to  enact  laws. It  consisted
of an  upper  chamber  and  a  lower
chamber. The  upper  chamber, called
the House  of Lords, included mem-
bers  of the  aristocracy. The  lower
chamber, called  the House  of Com-
mons, included  commoners—most-
ly  merchants  or property  owners
elected  by  other  property  owners.
American  legislatures grew out of the
English practice of representation.
New  Political  Ideas The  ideas  and  writings
of seventeenth-century English philosophers deeply
influenced  the  American  colonists. John  Locke,
Voltaire, and  Jean  Jacques Rousseau  believed  that
people should contract among themselves to  form
governments  to  protect  their  natural  rights.
Locke spelled out his political  ideas  in Two Treatises
of Government,1 first  published  in  1690. His
writings were  widely  read  and  discussed  in 
both Europe  and America. Colonial  leaders  such as
Benjamin Franklin, Thomas  Jefferson, and  James
Madison regarded these ideas as political truth.

See the following footnoted materials in the Reference Handbook:
1. Two Treatises of Government, page 806. 

▲
The House of Burgesses was the first elected lawmaking
body in the English colonies. The royal governor of Jamestown,
Sir George Yeardley, allowed the men of
the colony to elect representatives to the
assembly.

This report of the Virginia General 
▲
Assembly contains a partial list of the
22 men who hoped to be elected to
serve as burgesses. The burgesses
made local laws for the colony.

Growth of Democracy What 
aspects of the English govern-
ment influenced the creation 
of the House of Burgesses?

Locke  reasoned  that  in  a  state  of
nature  (before  governments  were  formed), all
people were born free, equal, and independent. He
believed  that  the  laws  of nature, or “natural  law,”
provided rights to life, liberty, and property. Locke
argued that if a government failed to protect these
natural  rights, the  people  could  change  that  gov-
ernment (social contract theory).
Such  political  philosophy  was  revolutionary
in an  age when monarchs  still  claimed  they  had
God-given  absolute  powers. Locke, Voltaire, and
Rousseau  denied  that  people  were  born  with 
an  obligation  to  obey  their  rulers. Rather, in 
his  “Second  Treatise  of Government,” Locke 
insisted that:

CHAPTER 2: ORIGINS OF AMERICAN GOVERNMENT 37

034-041 CH02S1-860053  12/1/04  1:29 AM  Page 38

The Thirteen Colonies
The Thirteen Colonies

Mayflower Compact, 1620

MASSACHUSETTS

Fundamental 
Orders of 
Connecticut, 1639

NEW
YORK
Hartford

NEW
HAMPSHIRE

Plymouth

RHODE
ISLAND

Philadelphia
PENNSYLVANIA

NEW
JERSEY

CONNECTICUT

MARYLAND

DELAWARE

Declaration of 
Independence, 1776
U.S. Constitution, 1789

House of 
Burgesses, 
1619

VIRGINIA

Jamestown

NORTH
CAROLINA

SOUTH
CAROLINA

GEORGIA

0

0

Government, then, was  legi-
timate  only  as  long  as  people 
continued  to  consent  to  it. The
Declaration  of Independence, the
Constitution, and  the  ideas  behind
the  French Revolution  all  reflected
this philosophy.

N

Atlantic
Ocean

New England
Colonies
Middle
Colonies
Southern
Colonies

200 kilometers

Government in 
the Colonies
The  Eng lish  founded  thir-
teen  colonies  along  the  east-
ern coast of North America between
1607 and 1733. From these colonies
the  present  system  of American
government  evolved. Each  English
colony  had  its  own  government
consisting  of a  governor, a  legisla-
ture, and  a  court  system. Neverthe-
less, the  British  believed  that  all
colonists  owed  allegiance   to  the
monarch. For  many  years  the
colonists agreed.
Democracy  grew  rapidly  in  all
the colonies, but  it did not yet exist
in its current form. Women and en-
slaved  persons  could  not  vote, and
every  colony   had  some  type  of
proper ty  qualification  for  voting .
Nine of the thirteen colonies had an
official  or  established  church, and
many colonists remained intolerant
of religious dissent. In Puritan town
meetings, for  example, voting was
originally  reserved  for members  of
the community church.
Despite such shortcomings, the
colonial  governments  did  in  fact
establish  practices  that  became  a
key  par t  of the  nation’s  system  of
government. Chief among  these  practices  were
(1)  a  written  constitution  that  guaranteed  basic
liber ties  and  limited  the  power  of government;
(2) a legislature of elected representatives; and (3)
the  separation  of powers  between  the  governor
(the  chief executive)  and  the  leg islature. Today
the United  States  government  embodies  each   of
these practices.

200 miles

Critical Thinking
                            Virginia, settled in 1607, was the 
first English colony in America. Georgia was the last, 
in 1733. How were the governments of these colonies 
similar?
“ Freedom of [people] under government is
to have a standing rule to live by . . . made
by the legislative power vested in it; a lib-
erty to follow [one’s] own will in all things,
when the rule prescribes not, and not to 
be subject to the inconstant, uncertain, un-
known, arbitrary will of another. . . . ”
—John Locke, 1690
38 CHAPTER 2: ORIGINS OF AMERICAN GOVERNMENT

034-041 CH02S1-860053  12/1/04  1:29 AM  Page 39

Written  Constitutions A  key  feature  of the
colonial  period  was  government  according  to  a
written  plan. The Mayflower Compact 1 that  the
Pilgrims signed in 1620 stands as the first example
of many colonial plans for self-government.
For ty-one men, representing  all  the  Pilgrim
families, drew  up  the Mayflower Compact  in  the
tiny  cabin  of their  ship, the Mayflower, anchored
off the New England coast. The Pilgrim leaders re-
alized  they  needed  rules  to  govern  themselves  if
they were to survive in the new land. Through the
Mayflower Compact, they agreed to:
“ Solemnly and mutually in the Presence of
God and one of another, covenant [pledge]
and combine ourselves together into a
Body Politick, for our better Ordering and
Preservation and Furtherance of the Ends
aforesaid. . . . ”—The Mayflower Compact, 1620
The  Pilgrims  also  agreed  to  choose  their  own
leaders  and  to make  their  own  laws, which  they
would design for their own benefit.
Beginning  in  1629, new  Puritan
immigrants settled nearby. Massachu-
setts  Bay  added  many  towns  to  the
original Plymouth settlement. In 1636
the colony adopted the Great Funda-
mentals, the first basic system of laws
in the English colonies.
In 1639 Puritans who had left the
Massachusetts Bay Colony to colonize
Connecticut  drew  up America’s  first
formal constitution, or charter, called
the  Fundamental  Orders  of Con-
necticut.2 This  document  laid  out  a
plan for government that gave the peo-
ple the right to elect the governor, judges,
and representatives to make laws.
Soon  after, other English  colonies
began drawing up  their own charters.
These documents established a system
of limited government and rule by law
in each of the colonies.

See the following footnoted materials in the
Reference Handbook:
1. Mayflower Compact, page 804. 
2. Fundamental Orders of Connecticut, 
page 805. 

Colonial  Legislatures Representative  assem-
blies also became firmly established in the colonies.
The Virginia House  of Burgesses, the  first  legisla-
ture  in America, was  established  in  1619, only  12
years  after  the  settlement  of Jamestown. Far ther
nor th, the  colonists’ religious  beliefs  played  an
important  role  in  the  development  of representa-
tive  assemblies. In  Eng land, the  king  appointed 
the  leaders  of the  Church  of Eng land. Puritans
rejected this idea. They believed that the members
of each  congregation  should  choose  their  own
ministers  and  leaders. Many  Puritans migrated  to
America  to  gain  the  freedom  to  organize  their
churches  as  they  chose. As  Puritan  congrega-
tions  gained  experience  in  electing  their  church
leaders  and  local  town  officials, they  came  to
believe  that  church  members  should  also  elect 
the  colony’s  government. In  1636  Puritans  in
Massachusetts  forced  their  leaders  to  reorganize
the government so that each town elected two rep-
resentatives to the General Court, the colony’s leg-
islative  assembly. By  the mid-1700s most  colonial
legislatures had been operating for more than 100

Forming a Government

Political Processes Tompkins H. Matteson painted Signing
the Compact on Board the Mayflower. In the compact the
Pilgrims pledged to obey the laws passed “for the general good
of the colony.” Why did the colonists feel they needed to 
draw up the Mayflower Compact?

CHAPTER 2: ORIGINS OF AMERICAN GOVERNMENT 39

034-041 CH02S1-860053  12/1/04  1:29 AM  Page 40

For  example, they  had  to  control  the  distribution
of land  and  construct  public  buildings  and  facili-
ties  such  as  roads, ferries, and  wharves. The
colonies  also had  to  establish new  towns, schools,
and civil and criminal courts.
Colonial  legislatures  were  examples  of the
consent of the governed because a large number of
qualified men voted. Although there were proper-
ty qualifications for voting, land was abundant and
most colonists could afford property.
Separation  of  Powers Colonial  char ters 
divided  the  power  of government. The  governor,
the  king’s  agent  in  the  colonies, had  executive
power. Colonial  leg islatures  had  the  power  to 
pass  laws, and  colonial  cour ts  heard  cases. This
pr inciple  of separat ion   of powers was  w idely
popularized  in Charles-Louis Montesquieu’s The
Spir it of Law s and  was  later  v ital  to  the  United
States  Constitution. Though  colonial  legislatures
and  courts  could  be  reviewed  by  a  committee  of
the  king’s  Pr ivy  Council, the  colonies  practiced
considerable self-government.
Colonial  legislatures  became  the  political
training  grounds  for  the  leaders who  later would
write the Constitution. Many of these leaders were
active in politics and had served in colonial legisla-
tures. Thus, the combination of their English her-
itage  and  colonial  experience  in  representative
self-government made  them  leaders  in what  one
historian called “the seedtime of the republic.”

Best Bird The bald eagle became our
national bird in 1782. What did this raptor
have going for it? The bird is native to the
United States, and to the Founders it
symbolized courage, strength, freedom, and
immortality. Benjamin Franklin,
however, disagreed with the 
other Founders. He thought 
the bald eagle was too 
aggressive and preferred 
the turkey. After a six-year 
debate, Franklin was 
outvoted, which no doubt 
ruffled his feathers.

years. As  a  result, representative  government was
an established tradition in America well before the
colonists  declared  their  independence  from Great
Britain in 1776.
These legislatures dominated colonial govern-
ment. The  rapidly  grow ing  colonies  constantly
needed new laws to cope with new circumstances.

S e c t i o n   1   A s s e s s m e n t
S e c t i o n   1   A s s e s s m e n t

Checking for Understanding
1. Main Idea In a graphic organizer similar to 
the one below, list three practices that were 
established by colonial governments and became
a key part of the 
Key Practices of American Government  
nation’s system 
of government.
2. Define limited government, representative 
government, separation of powers.
3. Identify Magna Carta, Petition of Right, 
English Bill of Rights, Mayflower Compact, 
Great Fundamentals.
4. Analyze John Locke’s natural law argument as it
applies to the social contract theory.

40 CHAPTER 2: ORIGINS OF AMERICAN GOVERNMENT

Critical Thinking
5. Identifying Central Issues The idea of limited
government, first established by the Magna
Carta, is an important principle of American 
government. Why must government be limited?

Growth of Democracy Review the key ideas 
of the English Bill of Rights outlined on pages
36 and 37. Write an essay explaining which
rights granted in the English Bill of Rights are
the most important today. Include reasons 
for your opinion.

034-041 CH02S1-860053  12/1/04  1:29 AM  Page 41

toto

SHOULD SONG LYRICS BE
PROTECTED BY THE FIRST
AMENDMENT?
Some people claim that rock music glamorizes destructive behavior. Critics of rock
music say that it encourages violence. Some people want to protect minors from
being exposed to the messages these types of songs convey.

PROTECTED AND UNPROTECTED SPEECH
The Supreme Court has generally agreed that
the right of free speech should be balanced against
the needs of society. Therefore, some forms of
speech are not given constitutional protection.
Defamatory speech, obscene speech, as well as
seditious speech, or speech that provokes acts of
violence fall outside First Amendment protection.

SOCIAL CONCERNS VS. ARTISTIC EXPRESSION
Parent groups, community leaders, and police
organizations are voicing their disapproval of some
kinds of music. They argue that lyrics condoning
murder and degrading women give listeners the im-
pression that this behavior is acceptable in our soci-
ety. Critics point to examples of violence and drug
use associated with the performers as evidence
that this type of music affects behavior. 

Some radio
stations have
voluntarily
stopped playing
the most contro-
versial music.
Congressional
hearings have
been held to 
listen to recommendations that range from putting
parent advisory labels on music to establishing a
rating system like the one used for movies. Some
record companies are now producing two versions
of songs with offensive lyrics—a “radio” version and
a “street” version. 
Many people, however, are reluctant to ask 
for government involvement for fear of treading on
First Amendment rights. Although the music may
be unacceptable to them, they do not think it
should be subject to censorship. 

Debating the Issue
Debating the Issue

DO YOU THINK SONG LYRICS SHOULD BE PROTECTED BY THE
FIRST AMENDMENT DESPITE THEIR CONTENT?
Take on the role of a concerned parent of a
violence or defames a portion of our population?
teenager. You could influence your congressional
✔Are there dangers in limiting artistic expression?
representative to vote for more controls over musi-
cal content, or for more freedom of expression in
the music industry.

Debate Allow time for students on both sides of the
issue to prepare speeches to be presented to the
class. Debate the issue in class. 

KEY ISSUES
✔Does society’s need to maintain order outweigh
the right for artistic expression, if the art promotes

Vote Make your own personal decision. As a class,
vote on the issue and record the results.

CHAPTER 2: ORIGINS OF AMERICAN GOVERNMENT 41

042-047 CH02S2-860053  12/1/04  1:30 AM  Page 42

Key Terms
revenue, embargo
Find Out
■ What factors caused the British to allow the
colonists to operate with little interference 
between 1607 and 1763?
■ Why were the colonists and the British unable 
to compromise and settle their differences?
Understanding Concepts
Growth of Democracy How did the colonial 
experience during the dispute with Britain 
help shape American ideals of constitutional
democracy?

S e c t i o n   2
S e c t i o n   2
Uniting for Independence
Until the mid-1700s Great Britain had al-
Reader’s Guide
lowed  its colonies across  the Atlantic  to
develop politically on their own. By the
1760s, however, things  had  begun  to
change dramatically as the British government felt
a need to tighten its control over the colonies.
The Colonies on Their Own
As  British  subjects, the  colonists  in North
America  owed  allegiance  to  the monarch
and the British government. As with other parts of
the  British  empire, the  colonies were  supposed  to
serve as a source of raw materials and a market for
British  goods. Thus, in  the  eyes  of the  British
crown, the American  colonies  existed  for  the  eco-
nomic benefit of Great Britain.
In practice, during the 150 years following the
settling  of Jamestown  in  1607, the  colonies  in
America  did  pretty  much  as  they  pleased. The
colonies were more  than  3,000 miles  (5,556  km)
from  Great  Britain. Orders  from  the  monarch
took two months or more to cross the Atlantic. In
addition, only the colonial legislatures were actu-
ally in a position to deal with the everyday prob-
lems facing the colonies. As a result, the colonists
grew  accustomed  to  governing  themselves
through their representatives.
Until  the mid-1700s  the British  government
was generally satisfied with this arrangement. The
British  needed  the  colonists’ loyalty  to  counter
the threat of the French in Canada. The colonists
remained  loyal  in  return  for  a  large measure  of
self-rule and protection from the French.
Britain  Tightens  Control Two  events
drastically  changed  the  easy  relationship  be-
tween the colonies and Britain. First, the French
and  Indian  War, fought  between  1754  and
1763, solidified Britain’s hold on the continent.
Second, George  III, who became king  in 1760,
had  different  ideas  about  how  the  colonies
should be governed.

Br i t ish  Ba t t le  Mi l i t ias
BOSTON ,  MASSACHUSETTS ,  A PR IL 1 7 7 5
A f o r c e   o r d e r e d   t o   d e -
s t r o y   t h e   s u p p l i e s   o f
s e l f - s t y l e d   p a t r i o t   m i l i t i a s
a n d   t o   a r r e s t   t w o   o f t h e i r
l e a d e r s   m e t   a rm e d   r e s i s -
t a n c e   o u t s i d e   t h e   c i t y   e a r l y
t o d a y. A b o u t   7 0 0   B r i t i s h
t r o o p s   s c a t t e r e d   s om e   7 0
c a l l e d
m i l i t i a   m em b e r s ,
D r um   u s e d   a t  
M i n u t e   M e n , w h o   h a d
L e x i n g t o n
g a t h e r e d   i n   t h e   t ow n   o f
L e x in g ton . T h e   t ro o p s   t h en
m a r c h e d   o n   t o   C o n c o r d . L a t e r, f i g h t i n g   b r o k e   o u t
w i t h   a n o t h e r   m i l i t i a   u n i t   a t   No r t h   Con co rd   B r i d g e .
A s   t h e   t ro o p s   r e t u r n e d   to   B o s ton , t h e y   c am e   un d e r
a t t a c k   f rom  m o r e  m i l i t i a   g ro u p s   b e f o r e   r e a ch i n g   t h e
s a f e t y   o f t h e   c i t y. L o s s e s   t o t a l e d   7 3   d e a d   a n d   1 7 4
wo u n d e d . Re b e l   c a s u a l t i e s  w e r e   s e t   a t   9 5 .

42 CHAPTER 2: ORIGINS OF AMERICAN GOVERNMENT

042-047 CH02S2-860053  12/1/04  1:30 AM  Page 43

The French and Indian War started as a strug-
gle  between  the  French  and  British  over  lands  in
western  Pennsylvania  and Ohio. By  1756  several
other European countries had become involved as
well. Great Britain eventually won the war in 1763
and gained complete control of the eastern third of
the continent.
The  defeat  of France  in  America  meant  the
American colonists no longer needed the British to
protect  them  from  the  French. The war, however,
left  the  British  government with  a  large war  debt
that the British expected the colonies to help repay.
Taxing  the  Colonies When  he  took  the
throne, George  III was  determined  to  deal more
firmly with the American colonies. To help pay for
the war, the king and his ministers  levied taxes on
tea, sugar, g lass, paper, and  other  products. The
Stamp Act of 1765  imposed  the  first direct  tax on
the colonists. It required them to pay a tax on legal
documents, pamphlets, newspapers, and even dice

and  playing  cards. Parliament  also  passed  laws  to
control colonial trade in ways that benefited Great
Britain but not the colonies.
Britain’s  revenue—the money  a  government
collects  from  taxes  or  other  sources—from  the
colonies  increased. Colonial  resentment, however,
grew  along  w ith  the  revenues. Political  protests
began  to  spread  throughout  the  colonies.
Colonists refused to buy British goods. This move
led  to  the  repeal of the Stamp Act, but  the British
passed other tax laws to replace it. In 1773 a group
of colonists, dressed  as  Mohawk, dumped  342
chests  of British  tea  into  Boston  Harbor. This
protest against further taxes on tea became known
as the Boston Tea Party.
In  retaliation  Parliament  passed  the Coercive
Acts, which  the  colonists  called  the  Intolerable
Acts. One  of these  acts  closed  Boston  Harbor.
Another withdrew  the  right  of the Massachusetts
colony  to  govern  itself. By  the  early  1770s, events
clearly showed that revolution was not far off.

Making a Difference “W ith a firm reliance
on the protection of
divine Providence,
Making a Difference
we mutually pledge to each other
our lives, our fortunes, and our
The Signers of
sacred honor.” With these final
the Declaration
words, the signers of the Declara-
tion of Independence launched
their nation’s bid for freedom. For
many who signed the Declaration,
achieving that goal came at great
personal cost.
Four of the signers—Edward
Rutledge, George Walton, Arthur
Middleton, and Thomas
Heyward—were taken prisoner
while fighting in South Carolina
and held for nearly a year. Richard
Stockton of New Jersey was taken
prisoner, beaten, and held for sev-
eral years. His health ruined, he
died soon after being released.
The New York home of signer
Francis Lewis was plundered, and
his wife was taken prisoner. Badly

mistreated, she died less than two
years after her release. William
Floyd of New York was forced to
flee with his family after the
British occupied his home. He
remained a refugee for seven
years, living on the charity of
friends. Altogether, the homes of
14 signers were invaded, their
property destroyed, and their
families forced to flee.
Carter Braxton of Virginia lost
the merchant ships he owned to
British naval attacks. Robert
Morris of Pennsylvania used a
large portion of his own wealth to
keep American troops in the field.
Although only Robert Stockton
appears to have lost his life as a
direct result of the war, it is clear
that all of the signers were willing
to risk everything in support of
the Revolutionary War. Without
their courage, independence
could not have been achieved.

CHAPTER 2: ORIGINS OF AMERICAN GOVERNMENT 43

042-047 CH02S2-860053  12/1/04  1:31 AM  Page 44

Growing Distrust

Civic Rights New British laws
caused discontent among colonists
who believed their civic rights were
being denied. Which civic rights
do you think Britain denied the
colonists?

Teapot—a 
symbol of 
resistance

impose direct taxes such as the
Stamp Tax.
By 1773 organizations called
committees   of cor respon-
dence were  urging  resistance
to  the British. These  commit-
tees  consisted  of colonists
who  wanted  to  keep  in  touch
w ith  one  another  as  events 
unfolded. Samuel Adams  es-
tablished  the  first  committee
in  Boston. The  idea  spread
quickly, and  w ithin  a  few
months, Massachusetts  alone
had more  than  80  such  com-
mittees. Virg inia  and  other
colonies  soon  joined  in  this
communication network.
The  First  Continental  Congress The  In-
tolerable Acts  prompted Virginia  and Massachu-
setts  to  call  a  general  meeting  of the  colonies.
Delegates from all the colonies except Georgia met
in Philadelphia on September 5, 1774, for the First
Continental Congress. Key colonial leaders such as
Patrick Henry, Samuel Adams, Richard Henry Lee,
and George Washington attended.
The delegates debated what to do about the re-
lationship  w ith  Great  Britain. They  finally  im-
posed  an  embargo, an  agreement  prohibiting
trade, on  Britain, and  agreed  not  to  use  British
goods. They also proposed a meeting the following
year if Britain did not change its policies.
Events then moved quickly. The British adopt-
ed  stronger measures. “The New England govern-
ments are in a state of rebellion,” George III firmly
announced. “Blows must  decide whether  they  are
to be subject to this country or independent.”
The  first  blow  fell  early  on  the  morning  of
April 19, 1775. British Redcoats clashed with colo-
nial  minutemen  at  Lexington  and  Concord  in
Massachusetts. This  clash, later  called  the “shot
heard ’round the world,” was the first battle of the
Revolutionary War.
The Second Continental Congress With-
in three weeks, delegates from all thirteen colonies
gathered in Philadelphia for the Second Continen-
tal Congress. This Congress assumed the powers of
a  central  government. It  chose  John Hancock  as

George III’s crown—a 
symbol of authority

Colonial Unity
Before  the  mid-1770s  most  colonists
thought of themselves as British subjects. At
the  same  time, each  of the  colonies  developed
largely  on  its  own. Thus, most  colonists  also
thought of themselves as Virginians or New York-
ers  or Georgians. Indeed, early  attempts  to  bring
the colonies together had failed.
Responding  to  French  attacks  on  the  frontier,
in 1754 Benjamin Franklin had proposed an inno-
vative  plan  for  uniting  the  colonies—the Albany
Plan  of Union. The  colonies  re jected  the  plan,
however, because it gave too much power to an as-
sembly made  up  of representatives  from  all  thir-
teen colonies.
By  the  1760s  the  harsh  new  British  policies
spurred an American sense of community. A grow-
ing  number  of colonists  began  to  think  of them-
selves  as  Americans  united  by  their  hostility  to
British  authority. At  the  same  time, colonial  lead-
ers began to take political action against what they
felt was British oppression.
Taking Action In 1765 nine colonies sent dele-
gates  to  a meeting  in New York  called  the  Stamp
Act Congress. This was the first meeting organized
by  the  colonies  to  protest King George’s  actions.
Delegates  to  the Congress  sent  a  petition  to  the
king, arguing  that  only  colonial  legislatures  could

44 CHAPTER 2: ORIGINS OF AMERICAN GOVERNMENT

042-047 CH02S2-860053  12/1/04  1:31 AM  Page 45

president, voted to organize an army and navy and
to  issue  money, and  made  George  Washington
commander  of a  newly  organizing  Continental
Army.
Although  it  had  no  constitutional  authority,
the Second Continental Congress served as the act-
ing  government  of the  colonies  throughout  the
war. It purchased supplies, negotiated treaties, and
rallied support for the colonists’ cause.

Independence
As  the Congress  set  to work, the  indepen-
dence  movement  was  grow ing  rapidly. A
brilliant pamphlet titled Common Sense, written by

Thomas Paine, influenced many colonists. Paine, a
onetime British corset-maker, argued that monar-
chy was  a  corrupt  form   of government  and  that
George III was an enemy to liberty:
“ First, the powers of governing still remain-
ing in the hands of the king, he will have a
negative over the whole legislation on this
continent. And as he has shown himself
such an inveterate enemy to liberty and
discovered such a thirst for arbitrary
power, is he, or is he not, a proper person
to say to these colonies, ‘You shall make no
laws but what I please!’ ”—Thomas Paine

COMPARING Governments
COMPARING Governments
Independence Days 
Independence Days 
Independence Days 
Around the World
Around the World
Around the World

EUROPE
Ireland 
December 6, 1921

Ukraine 
August 24, 1991

ASIA

NORTH AMERICA
United States 
July 4, 1776

Mexico
September 16, 1810

India 
August 15, 1947
Vietnam 
September 2, 1945
Indonesia 
August 17, 1945

CENTRAL 
AMERICA
Nicaragua 
September 15, 1821

Cuba
December 10, 1898

Dominican Republic 
February 27, 1844

SOUTH AMERICA
Peru 
July 28, 1821

Chile 
September 18, 1810

Brazil 
September 7, 1822

MIDDLE EAST
Israel
May 14, 1948

AFRICA
South Africa 
May 31, 1910

Nigeria 
October 1, 1960

Libya 
December 24, 1951

Source: CIA, The World Factbook 2002 (Washington, D.C.: 2002).

Critical Thinking
                            The desire to operate a government independent of outside influence is common 
around the world. Which nations have gained their independence since 1950?

CHAPTER 2: ORIGINS OF AMERICAN GOVERNMENT 45

042-047 CH02S2-860053  12/1/04  1:32 AM  Page 46

Ready for Independence

Growth of Democracy In
Pulling Down the Statue of George
III, William Walcutt depicted Ameri-
cans celebrating their indepen-
dence by tearing down the statue
of King George III in New York on
July 9, 1776. The statue was later
melted down into bullets to be
used against the king’s troops.
Why was the Declaration of 
Independence revolutionary?

Lap desk Jefferson used
to draft the Declaration
of Independence

patriot
The  v iews  of
Samuel Adams  also  influenced
the  colonists. Adams  asked, “Is
not America  already  independent? Why  not  then
declare  it?” In  June  1776, more  than  a  year  after
fighting had begun in the colonies, Richard Henry
Lee of Virginia did just that. Lee introduced a res-
olution  in  the Continental Congress “[t]hat  these
United Colonies are, and of right ought to be, free
and independent states.”
The  Declaration  of  Independence After
Lee’s  resolution, the Congress  promptly  named  a
committee  composed  of John Adams, Benjamin
Franklin, Thomas Jefferson, Robert Livingston, and
Roger  Sherman  to  prepare  a  written  declaration
of independence. The  committee  asked  Thomas
Jefferson, a Virginia planter  known  for his writing
skills, to write the draft. On June 28 the committee
submitted the edited draft to the Congress.
On  July  2, 1776, the  Congress  approved
Lee’s resolution. The colonies had officially broken
w ith  Great  Britain. The  Congress  then  turned
its attention to Jefferson’s draft. After considerable
debate, a  few  passages  were  removed  and  some
editorial  changes were made. On  July  4  the Con-
gress approved the final draft of the Declaration of
Independence. John Hancock, the president of the

46 CHAPTER 2: ORIGINS OF AMERICAN GOVERNMENT

Congress, was  the
first  to  sign  the
document, which
eventually held the signatures of all 56 delegates. A
statement  of the  reasons  for  independence, the
document’s actual title was “The unanimous Dec-
laration of the thirteen united States of America.”
Key Parts of the Declaration The American
Declaration  of Independence1 is  one  of the most
famous documents in history. In writing the docu-
ment Jefferson drew together the ideas of thinkers
such  as  Locke  and  others  to  set  out  the  colonies’
reasons  for  proclaiming  their  freedom. The  pur-
pose  of the Declaration was  to  justify  the  revolu-
tion and to put forth the founding principles of the
new nation. Jefferson later wrote:
“ I did not consider it any part of my charge
to invent new ideas, but to place before
mankind the common sense of the subject
in terms so plain and firm as to command
their assent. . . . It was intended to be an
expression of the American mind. ”
—Thomas Jefferson
See the following footnoted materials in the Reference Handbook:
1. Declaration of Independence, pages 770–773.

042-047 CH02S2-860053  12/1/04  1:32 AM  Page 47

The revolutionary document stirred the hearts
of the American people. No government at the time
had been founded on the principles of human lib-
erty and consent of the governed. The Declaration
won  praise  the  world  over  and  influenced  the
French Revolution  of 1789. Over  the  years many
nations, particularly in Latin America, have used it
as a model in their own efforts to gain freedom.
The Declaration has three parts. It begins with
a statement of purpose and basic human rights:
“We hold these truths to be self-evident,
that all men are created equal, that they
are endowed by their Creator with certain
unalienable Rights, that among these are
Life, Liberty and the Pursuit of Happiness.
That to secure these rights, Governments
are instituted among Men, deriving their
just powers from the consent of the 
governed. . . . ”
The  middle  section  of the  Declaration  lists
specific  complaints  against George  III. Each  item
describes a violation of the colonists’ political, civil,
and economic liberties. These paragraphs were de-
signed to justify the break with Great Britain.
The  conclusion  states  the  colonists’ determi-
nation to separate from Great Britain. Their efforts
to reach a peaceful solution to their problems had
failed, leaving  them no choice but  to declare  their
freedom.

The  First  State  Constitutions The Decla-
ration  of Independence  recognized  the  changes
taking  place  in  the  colonies. One  of the most  im-
por tant  of these  was  the  transformation  of the
colonies into states subject to no higher authority.
Thus, the  states  saw  themselves  as “states” in  the
sense in which this term is used in Chapter 1.
About  two months  before  the Declaration  of
Independence, the  Second Continental Congress
had  instructed  each of the  colonies  to  form “such
governments as shall . . . best conduce [lead] to the
happiness and  safety of their constituents.” By  the
end of 1776, 10 states had adopted written consti-
tutions. Within  a  few  years  every  former  colony
had  a  new  constitution  or  had  converted  the  old
colonial charters into state constitutions.
Most of the new constitutions contained a bill
of rights defining the personal liberties of citizens.
All  recognized  the  people  as  the  sole  source  of
authority in a limited government with only those
powers given by the people.

GOVERNMENT

Student Web Activity Visit the United States
Government: Democracy  in Action Web site at
gov.glencoe.com and click on Chapter 2–Student
Web Activities for an activity about uniting  for
independence.

Checking for Understanding
1. Main Idea In a graphic organizer similar to the
one below, identify the series of events that led
the colonies to declare their independence.

S e c t i o n   2   A s s e s s m e n t
S e c t i o n   2   A s s e s s m e n t
S e c t i o n   2   A s s e s s m e n t
S e c t i o n   2   A s s e s s m e n t
Critical Thinking
5. Analyzing Information Why did Jefferson’s
principles and ideas in the Declaration of
Independence support separation from England?

Declaration of
Independence

2. Define revenue, embargo.
3. Identify Stamp Act, Intolerable Acts, Albany Plan
of Union.
4. What actions did George III take to make the
Americans pay for the French and Indian War?

Growth of Democracy The right of people to
complain to the government is one of the fun-
damental American rights. Identify a recent
government action or policy with which you dis-
agree. Decide on a protest method that would
be an effective way for you to express your
feelings about the issue. Support your method
in the form of a letter to the editor.

CHAPTER 2: ORIGINS OF AMERICAN GOVERNMENT 47

048-052 CH02S3-860053  12/1/04  1:32 AM  Page 48

S e c t i o n   3
S e c t i o n   3
The Ar ticles of Confederation
When Richard Henry Lee proposed his
Reader’s Guide
resolution  for  independence  in  June
1776, he  also  proposed  that  a “plan
for  confederation” be  prepared  for
the  colonies. In  1777  a  committee  appointed  by
Congress  presented  a  plan  called  the Ar ticles  of
Confederation.1 The Articles  basically  continued
the  structure  and  operation  of government  as  es-
tablished under the Second Continental Congress.
The  states wanted  a  confederation, or “league  of
friendship,” among  the  13  independent  states
rather  than  a  strong  national  government. By
March 1781, all 13 states had ratified, or approved,
the Articles of Confederation.

Key Terms
ratify, unicameral, cede, ordinance
Find Out
■ What weakness of the Articles of Confederation
made enforcing the laws of Congress 
impossible? 
■ What evidence shows that financial problems
were the main cause of the call to amend the 
Articles of Confederation? 
Understanding Concepts
Federalism What deficiencies in the Articles of
Confederation made them too weak to ensure the
peace and tranquility of the United States?

Government Under the Articles
Under  the Articles, the  plan  for  the  central
government  was  simple. It  included  a
unicameral, or  single-chamber, Congress  from
which  executive  positions were  chosen. A Com-
mittee of the States made up of one delegate from
each  state managed  the  government when Con-
gress  was  not  assembled. There  was  no  federal
court  system. Congress  settled  disputes  among
states. Each state had one vote in Congress, no mat-
ter what  its  size  or population. Every  state  legisla-
ture  selected  its  own  representatives  to Congress,
paid them, and could recall them at any time.
Congress had only  those powers expressed  in
the Articles. All  other  powers  remained with  the
independent states. Congressional powers includ-
ed  the  powers  to: (1) make  war  and  peace; (2)
send  and  receive  ambassadors; (3)  enter  into
treaties; (4)  raise  and  equip  a navy; (5) maintain
an army by requesting  troops  from the states; (6)
appoint  senior military officers; (7)  fix  standards
of weights  and measures; (8)  regulate  Indian  af-
fairs; (9)  establish  post  offices; and  (10) decide
certain disputes among the states.

See the following footnoted materials in the Reference Handbook:
1. Articles of Confederation, pages 808 – 811. 

Congress Flees Capital
PHILADELPHIA,   JUNE 1783
A con t in g en t   o f un p a i d   an d
unhappy   so ld ie r s   f rom   the
recen t ly   d i sbanded   Con t inen ta l
Army   demons t ra ted   ou ts ide   the
s t a tehou s e   th i s   w e e k . Th e   p ro -
s h o u t e d   c u r s e s   an d
t e s t e r s  
t h r e a t s   a t   t h e   Con f e d e r a t i on
Con g r e s s , w h i ch   w a s   m e e t i n g
in s ide . Some   poked   the i r   bayo -
ne ts  through  the  w indows  o f the
m e e t ing   chamb e r s . Th e   l eg i s la -
tors   are   sa id   to   be   ex t reme-
ly   fr igh tened . Cong ress   has
a s ke d   th e   s t a t e   f o r   p ro t e c -
t ion , bu t  Pennsy lvan ia  o f f ic ia ls  have  prov ided  no  as-
s is tance . At   las t  repor t   the  cong ressmen  have   le f t   the
c i t y   and   w i l l   re conven e   th e   gove rnm en t   a t   Pr in ce -
ton , New   Jersey.

C o n t i n e n t a l   s o l d i e r

48 CHAPTER 2: ORIGINS OF AMERICAN GOVERNMENT

048-052 CH02S3-860053  12/1/04  1:32 AM  Page 49

Weaknesses of the Articles
Although  the  Ar ticles  of Confederation
gave Congress  power, they  created  a weak
national  government. Because  each   state  had  no
intention  of giving  up  its  sovereignty  to  a  central
government, the Articles had weaknesses.
First, Congress did not have the power to levy
or collect  taxes. It could  raise money only by bor-
rowing or requesting money from the states. Each
state had to collect taxes from its citizens and turn
the money over to the national treasury. Congress
could  do  little, however, if a  state  refused  to  pro-
vide the money.

Second, Congress  did  not  have   the  power  to
regulate trade. Economic disputes among the var-
ious  states  and  difficulty  in  making  business
arrangements with other countries resulted.
Third, Congress  could  not  force  anyone  to
obey  the  laws  it  passed  or  to  abide  by  the Articles
of Confederation. Congress could only advise and
request the states to comply.
Fourth, laws needed the approval of 9 of the 13
states. Usually, delegates  from  only  9  or  10  states
were in Congress at any time, making it difficult to
pass  laws. Also, each  state  had  only  a  single  vote.
The votes of any 5 of the smaller states could block
a measure that 8 of the larger states wanted.

Government Under the Articles of Confederation
Government Under the Articles of Confederation

VIRGINIA

SOUTH 
CAROLINA

CONNECTICUT

RHODE 
ISLAND

Sovereign state 
governments had power …

DELAWARE

PENNSYLVANIA

NORTH 
CAROLINA

To enforce or impede national government policy

To control state militia

To withhold or grant revenues to the national 
government

To veto amendments to the Articles of 
Confederation

To regulate foreign and interstate commerce

GEORGIA

MARYLAND

NEW
YORK

MASSACHUSETTS

NEW JERSEY

NEW
HAMPSHIRE

Critical Thinking
                            The Articles of Confederation established a league of cooperation among the 
13 states, but the national government had only limited powers and was dependent on the 
states for revenue, soldiers, and law enforcement. Why was the Confederation Congress often 
short of money to run the government?

CHAPTER 2: ORIGINS OF AMERICAN GOVERNMENT 49

048-052 CH02S3-860053  12/1/04  1:33 AM  Page 50

Fifth, amending, or  changing, the Articles  re-
quired  the  consent  of all  states. In  practice  it 
was  impossible  to  get  all the  states  to  agree  on
amendments. As  a  result  the Articles were  never
amended.
Sixth, the central government did not have an
executive branch. The Confederation  government
carried  on  much  of its  business, such  as  selling
western  lands  and  establishing  a  postal  system,
through  congressional  committees. Without  an
executive, however, there was  no  unity  in  policy
making and no way to coordinate the work of the
different committees.
Finally, the  government  had no national  court
system. Instead, state courts enforced and interpret-
ed national laws. The lack of a court system made it
difficult  for  the  central  government  to  settle  dis-
putes  among  the  states. A  legislator  from  North
Carolina  addressed  the  powerlessness  of the Con-
federation in a speech to his state legislature in 1787:
“ The general government ought . . . to 
possess the means of preserving the peace
and tranquility of the union. . . . The 
encroachments of some states, on the rights
of others, and of all on those of the confed-
eracy, are incontestible [cannot be denied]
proofs of the weakness and imperfection 
of that system. ” —William Davie, 1787

Achievements
Despite  its weaknesses, the Confederation
accomplished important tasks. The greatest
achievement was the establishment of a fair policy
for  the  development  of the  lands west  of the Ap-
palachians. The  individual  states  ceded, or  yield-
ed, their  claims  to  these  territories  to  the  central
government, providing a focus for national unity.
Congress  enacted  two  land  ordinances, or  laws,
that  prov ided  for  the  organization  of
these
terr itor ies. The  Ordinance  of 1785  allowed 
for  their  survey  and  div ision, while  the Nor th-
west  Ordinance of 1787  established  the  pr in-
ciple  that  the  terr itor ies  were  to  be  developed 
for  statehood  on  an  equal  basis  w ith  the  older
states.
Another  impor tant  accomplishment  was  a
peace treaty with Great Britain. Under the terms of
the  treaty, signed  in  1783, Britain  recognized
American  independence. Land  acquired  from
Britain  also  greatly  enlarged  the  nation’s  bound-
aries, including  all  land  from  the Atlantic  coast  to
the Mississippi River and from the Great Lakes and
Canada to the present-day boundary of Florida.
Congress  also  set  up  the  departments  of For-
eign Affairs, War, Marine, and  the  Treasury, each
under a single permanent secretary. This develop-
ment  set  a  precedent  for  the  creation  of cabinet 
depar tments  under  the  Constitution  of 1787.

Applying for a Passport
Planning a trip overseas? If so, you may need
a passport—an official document that grants
a citizen the right to travel to another country.
United States passports are issued by the Depart-
ment of State in Washington, D.C.
A passport application can be obtained from
your post office or from any federal or state court.
There is a required fee, and two current, identical
photos of your full face are needed to help prove
who you are. You will also need a document, such
as a birth certificate, to prove that you are a U.S.
citizen. Instructions on the application detail the
types of proof of citizenship that are acceptable.

50

It is often the case
that several weeks may
pass before you receive 
your passport in the mail,
so apply well in advance of
the trip. Your passport will
be valid for 5 or 10 years,
depending on your age. 

A United States 
passport

articipating
articipating
I N   G O V E R N M E N T  
I N   G O V E R N M E N T  

A C T I V I T Y
A C T I V I T Y

Investigate Further Search  the  Internet using  the
word passport  to determine which  foreign coun-
tries have additional  requirements  for visitors.

048-052 CH02S3-860053  12/1/04  1:33 AM  Page 51

Growing Unrest

Past Government authorities often jailed
debtor farmers or seized their property. Shays
led armed men to capture and close the courts,
stopping land confiscations. 

▲

Present This marker commemorates Shays’s
revolt. The state militia attacked Shays’s men
in this field and killed more than 30 of them.
▲

Reaction to Rebellion
How do you think 
Americans viewed the
government after
Shays’s Rebellion?

To  encourage  cooperation
among  the  states, the Arti-
cles provided that each state
give “full faith and credit” to
the  legal  acts  of the  other
states  and  treat  one  anoth-
er’s  citizens  w ithout  dis-
crimination. This provision,
often  ignored, was  carried  over  to  the Constitu-
tion, under which it could be enforced.

Need for Stronger Government
Despite  its  achievements, the  Confedera-
tion  faced difficulties  in dealing with prob-
lems facing the nation. The structure of the central
government  could  not  coordinate  the  actions  of
the states effectively.
Growing  Problems Soon  after  the  war, the
states  began  to  quarrel, mainly  over  boundary 
lines  and  tariffs. New  Jersey  farmers, for  example,
had to pay fees to sell their vegetables in New York.
Some  states  even  began  to  deal  directly with  for-
eign  nations. Congress  could  do  little  about  these
matters.
Even  worse, the  new  nation  faced  serious
money  problems. By  1787  the  government  owed
$40 million to foreign governments and to Ameri-
can  soldiers  still  unpaid  after  the  Revolutionary
War. Without money, the  government  could  not
maintain an army for defense of the states.

The  states  also  faced  growing  financial  trou-
bles. By  1786  an  economic  depression  had  left
many  farmers  and  small merchants  angry  and  in
debt.
Shays’s  Rebellion These  economic  troubles
led  to rebellion. Armed groups of farmers  forced
several  cour ts  to  close  in  order  to  prevent  farm
foreclosures and  the  loss of their  farms. The men
hoped  that  the  state  would  pass  laws  allow ing
them  to keep  their  farms  through  the depression.
Daniel  Shays, a  former  captain  in  the  Revolu-
tionary Army, led  a  band  that  closed  the Massa-
chusetts  state  supreme  cour t. When  their  pleas
brought no help from the justices, Shays gathered
a  force of 1200 men  and  advanced on  the  federal
arsenal in Springfield.
The  Massachusetts  militia  put  down  the
rebellion, but  the  armed unrest  frightened Ameri-
can  leaders. Henry  Knox, later  the  nation’s  first
secretary  of war, echoed  the  growing  number  of
Americans who were ready to agree to a strong na-
tional government. In a letter to George Washington,
Knox wrote:

CHAPTER 2: ORIGINS OF AMERICAN GOVERNMENT 51

048-052 CH02S3-860053  12/1/04  1:33 AM  Page 52

“ This dreadful situation 
has alarmed every man 
of principle and property
in New England. [People
wake] as from a dream
and ask what has been
the cause of our delu-
sion. What [will] give
us security against the
violence of lawless
men? Our government
must be [strengthened],
changed, or altered 
to secure our lives 
and property. ”—Henry Knox
The  Annapolis  Convention
The  Constitutional  Convention
was  the  result  of two  prev ious
meetings. George Washington, re-
tired and  living at his Mount Ver-
non  estate, was  concerned  about
problems  that  had  arisen  between Maryland  and
his  home  state  of Virg inia.
In  1785  he 
inv ited  representatives  from  both  states  to 
Mount  Vernon  to  discuss  differences  over 
their  currencies, impor t  duties, and  nav igation 
on  the  Potomac  River  and  Chesapeake  Bay.
The meeting  was  very  successful, inspir ing Vir-
g inia’s  representatives  in  1786  to  cal l  al l  states 
to  another meeting—a  convention  at Annapolis,

Delegates
Alexander
Hamilton
(above) 
and James
Madison
(right)

Maryland, to  discuss  commerce. Al-
though  all  states  were  inv ited, only 
five  sent  delegates. Among  the  dele-
gates  were  Alexander  Hamilton 
of New York  and  James Madison 
of Virginia,
two  leaders  who 
favored  a 
stronger  national 
government. With  Shays  and 
his  followers  threatening  the 
government  of Massachu-
setts, Hamilton  per-
suaded 
the  other
delegates  to  call  for
another  conven-
tion  in  Philadel-
phia 
in  May
1787. The  pur-
pose  of
this
meeting  would
be  to  regulate
commerce  among
the  states  and  to
propose 
changes
that would make  the
national  government
more effective.
After some hesitation,
the  Confederation  Congress  gave  its  consent  to
hold the Philadelphia convention “for the sole and
express purpose of revising the Articles of Confed-
eration.” The  stage was now  set  for what has been
called the “miracle at Philadelphia.”

S e c t i o n   3   A s s e s s m e n t
S e c t i o n   3   A s s e s s m e n t

Articles of Confederation
Weaknesses Achievements

Checking for Understanding
1. Main Idea In a graphic organizer similar to 
the one below, list the major weaknesses of 
government under 
the Articles of 
Confederation and 
its achievements.
2. Define ratify, unicameral, cede, ordinance.
3. Identify Northwest Ordinance.
4. How was the original government under the 
Articles of Confederation organized?
5. Describe two financial problems that could not
be resolved under the Articles of Confederation.

52 CHAPTER 2: ORIGINS OF AMERICAN GOVERNMENT

Critical Thinking
6. Identifying Central Issues What problems did
Shays’s Rebellion reveal?

Federalism The plan for confederation that was
ratified in 1781 called for a “league of friend-
ship” among 13 independent states. What 
are some examples of interstate cooperation
today? Find a recent example of states cooper-
ating with one another in issues such as curb-
ing air pollution or cleaning up waterways.

053-061 CH02S4-860053  12/1/04  1:34 AM  Page 53

Key Terms
interstate commerce, extralegal, anarchy
Find Out
■ How did the Connecticut Compromise settle the
most divisive issue among members of the 
Constitutional Convention?
■ What were the key arguments presented by the
Federalists and Anti-Federalists? 
Understanding Concepts
Civil Liberties Why do you think many people 
insisted on a Bill of Rights in the Constitution? 

S e c t i o n   4
S e c t i o n   4
The Constitutional Convention
The Constitutional Convention  began  its
Reader’s Guide
work  on May  25, 1787. All  the  states  ex-
cept  Rhode  Island  sent  delegates. The
state  legislatures  appointed  74  delegates
to the Convention, but only 55 attended. Of these,
39 signed the final constitution.
The Convention Begins
The delegates had great practical experience
in politics. Seven had served as governors of
their states. Thirty-nine had served in the Confed-
eration  Congress. Many  had  helped  write  their
state  constitutions. Eight  had  signed  the Declara-
tion of Independence, and six delegates had signed
the Articles of Confederation.
Several men stood out as leaders. The presence
of George Washington  ensured  that many  people
would  trust  the  Convention’s  work. Benjamin
Franklin, world  famous  as  a  scientist  and  diplo-
mat, now 81 years old, played an active role in the
debates.
Two  other  Pennsylvanians  also  played  key
roles. James Wilson often read Franklin’s speech-
es  and  did  important work  on  the  details  of the
Constitution. Gouverneur Morris, an  eloquent
speaker  and writer, wrote  the  final  draft  of the
Constitution.
From Virginia  came  James Madison, a  bril-
liant  advocate  of a  strong  national  government.
His  careful  notes  are  the major  source  of infor-
mation  about  the Convention’s work. Madison
is  often  called  the  Father  of the Constitution
because  he was  the  author  of the  basic  plan  of
government  that  the  Convention  eventually
adopted.
Organization The  Convention  began  by
unanimously  choosing George Washington  to
preside  over  the meetings. It  also  decided  that
each state would have one vote on all questions.
A  simple majority  vote  of those  states  present
would make  decisions. No meetings  could  be

Massachuse t ts  Approves !
BOSTON ,   F EBRUARY 1 7 8 8
B y   a   n a r r ow   m a r g i n ,
M a s s a c h u s e t t s   y e s t e r -
d a y   b e c am e   t h e   s i x t h   s t a t e
t o   a p p r o v e   t h e   p r o p o s e d
n e w   n a t i o n a l   c o n s t i t u t i o n .
T h e   vo t e   by   t h e   s p e c i a l   r a t i -
f y i n g   c o n v e n t i o n   e n d e d
n e a r l y   a   m o n t h   o f h e a t e d
d e b a t e   o n   t h e   i s s u e . L a s t -
m i n u t e   s u p p o r t   b y   G o v e r -
J o h n   H a n c o c k   a n d
n o r  
J o h n   H a n c o c k  
w e l l - k n ow n   r a d i c a l   l e a d e r
S am   Ad am s   m ay   h ave   b e e n
t h e   k e y   t o   t h e   F e d e r a l i s t   v i c t o r y. T h e   F e d e r a l i s t s
s e em   to   h ave  won  Ad am s ’s   en d o r s em en t   by   p rom i s -
in g  ch an g e s   to   t h e  p ro p o s e d  con s t i t u t i on . Han co c k ’s
s u p p o r t   i s  b e l i e ve d  to  com e  f rom  t h e  s u g g e s t i o n  t h a t
h e  wo u l d  b e com e  t h e  f i r s t  p r e s i d e n t  i f V i r g i n i a  f a i l e d
to   a p p rove   t h e   d o c um en t , m a k in g  G e o r g e  Wa s h in g -
ton   in e l i g i b l e   f o r   t h a t   o f f i c e .

CHAPTER 2: ORIGINS OF AMERICAN GOVERNMENT 53

053-061 CH02S4-860053  12/1/04  1:34 AM  Page 54

held unless delegates  from at  least  seven of the 13
states were present.
The  delegates  decided  to  keep  the  public  and
press  from  attending  the  sessions. This was  a  key
decision  because  it made  it  possible  for  the  dele-
gates to talk freely.
Key Agreements While the delegates original-
ly came together to revise the Articles, they eventu-
ally agreed to abandon the former government and
begin again. The delegates reached a consensus on
many  basic  issues. All  favored  the  idea  of limited
and  representative  government. They  agreed  that
the powers  of the national  government  should  be
divided  among  legislative, executive, and  judicial
branches. They  all  believed  it  was  necessary  to
limit  the  power  of the  states  to  coin money  or  to
interfere  w ith  creditors’ rights. And  all  of them
agreed  that  they  should  strengthen  the  national
government.
The  great  debates  and  compromises  of the
Convention  were   not  over  these  fundamental
questions. Rather, they dealt with how to put these
ideas into practice.

Decisions and Compromises
After  the  rules were  adopted, the Conven-
tion  opened with  a  surprise. It  came  from
the Virginia delegation who presented a plan for a
strong national government.
The  Virginia  Plan On May  29 Edmund Ran-
dolph  of Virginia  introduced  15  resolutions  that
James  Madison  had  drafted. They  came  to   be
called the Virginia Plan. The plan proposed a gov-
ernment based on three principles: (1) a strong na-
tional legislature with two chambers, the lower one
to be chosen by the people and the upper chamber
to  be  chosen  by  the  lower. The  legislature would
have  the  power  to  bar  any  state  laws  it  found  un-
constitutional; (2) a strong national executive to be
chosen  by  the  national  legislature; and  (3)  a  na-
tional judiciary to be appointed by the legislature.
The  introduction  of the Virginia  Plan was  a
brilliant political move on the part of the national-
ists. By  offering  a  complete  plan  at  the  very  start,
the  nationalists  set  the  direction  and  agenda  for
the  rest  of the Convention. Eventually, and  after
much  discussion  by   delegates  who  required  a

54 CHAPTER 2: ORIGINS OF AMERICAN GOVERNMENT

number  of modifications, the Virginia  Plan  be-
came the basis of the new Constitution.
The  delegates  debated  the Virginia  Plan  for
more  than  two weeks. Delegates  from  the  smaller
states soon realized that the larger, more populous
states would be in control of a strong national gov-
ernment  under  the  Virginia  Plan. The  smaller
states  wanted  a  less  powerful  government  w ith
more independence for the states.
The  New  Jersey  Plan On  June  15  the  dele-
gates from the small states, led by William Paterson
of New  Jersey, made  a  counterproposal. The New
Jersey  Plan  called  for  government  based  on  keep-
ing the major feature of the Articles of Confedera-
tion—a  unicameral  legislature, with  one  vote  for
each  state. Congress, however, would be  strength-
ened  by  giving  it  the  power  to   impose  taxes  and
regulate trade. A weak executive consisting of more
than  one  person would  be  elected  by Congress. A
national  judiciary w ith  limited  power would  be
appointed by the executive.
Paterson  argued  that  the Convention  should
not  deprive  the  smaller  states  of the  equality  they
had under the Articles. Thus, his plan was designed
simply  to amend  the Articles. The central govern-
ment was to continue as a confederation of sover-
eign  states. After  some  discussion  the New  Jersey
Plan was  rejected. The  delegates  returned  to  con-
sidering the Virginia Plan.
As  the  summer  grew  hotter, so  did  the  dele-
gates’ tempers. Soon  the  Convention  was  dead-
locked  over  the  question  of the  representation  of
states  in Congress. Should  the states be represent-
ed on the basis of population (favored by the large-
state  delegations)  or  should  they  be  represented
equally, regardless  of population  (favored  by  the
small-state  delegations)?  The  debate  was  bitter,
and the Convention was in danger of dissolving.
The  Connecticut  Compromise Finally, a
special committee designed a compromise. Called
the Connecticut Compromise because Roger Sher-
man  and  the  delegation  from  that  state  played  a
key  role  on  the  committee, this  plan was  adopted
after  long debate. The compromise  suggested  that
the  legislative  branch have  two parts: (1)  a House
of Representatives, with state representation based
on  population. All  revenue  laws—concerning
spending  and  taxes—would  begin  in  this  house;

053-061 CH02S4-860053  12/1/04  1:34 AM  Page 55

and  (2)  a  Senate, with  two mem-
bers  from  each  state. State  legisla-
tures would elect senators.
The  larger  states  would  have
an advantage in the House of Rep-
resentatives, where  representation
was  to  be  based  on  population.
The smaller states would be protect-
ed  in  the  Senate, where  each  state
would have equal representation.
The  Three-Fifths  Compro-
mise A  second  compromise  set-
tled  a  disagreement  over  how  to
determine  how many  representa-
tives  each  state would  have  in  the
House. Almost  one-third  of the
people  in the Southern states were
enslaved African Americans. These
states wanted  enslaved  persons  to
be counted the same as free people
to give the South more representa-
tion. At the same time, the Southern states did not
want  enslaved  persons  counted  at  all  for  levying
taxes. Because the North did not have many enslaved
persons, Northern  states  took  the  opposite  posi-
tion. They wanted  the  enslaved  persons  counted
for tax purposes but not for representation.
The  Three-Fifths  Compromise  settled  this
deadlock. Three-fifths  of the  enslaved  people 
were  to  be  counted  for  both  tax  purposes  and 
for representation.
Compromise  on  Commerce  and  the
Slave Trade A third compromise resolved a dis-
pute over commerce and the slave trade itself. The
Northern  states wanted  the  government  to  have
complete power over trade with other nations. The
Southern  states  depended  heavily  on  agricultural
exports. They  feared  that  business  interests  in  the
North might have enough votes in Congress to set
up  trade  agreements  that would  hurt  them. They
also feared the North might interfere with the slave
trade.
Again, a compromise settled the issue. The del-
egates determined that Congress could not ban the
slave  trade until 1808. At  the  same  time, they  gave
Congress  the  power  to  regulate  both  interstate
commerce, or  trade  among  the  states, and  foreign
commerce. To protect the South’s exports, however,

The Three-Fifths Compromise

Constitutional Ideals
By accepting the Three-
Fifths Compromise, the
Framers, in essence, con-
doned slavery. Leaders, 
like Thomas Jefferson, (left)
accepted slavery as a social
norm. Isaac Jefferson,
(below) was an enslaved
worker at Jefferson’s home,
Monticello. How does slav-
ery clash with the ideals
of the Revolution?

Congress was
forbidden  to
impose  ex-
port taxes. As
a  result, the
United States is one of the few nations in the world
today that does not tax its exports.
The  Slavery  Question The word  slave does
not  appear  in  the Constitution. Beyond  the  com-
promises  just  discussed, the  Constitution  dealt
with  slavery only by noting  that  those escaping  to
free  states  could  be  returned  to  the  slaveholders
(Article IV, Section 2).1 At the time, many North-
ern states were beginning to outlaw slavery. Mass-
achusetts, Delaware, Connecticut, Pennsylvania,
and Rhode  Island were all devising ways  to  elimi-
nate  the  practice  of slavery. This  effort  took  time,
however, and most Northern  states  did  not  com-
pletely eliminate slavery until the early 1800s.
Whatever  their  personal  beliefs  about  slavery,
the delegates knew that the Southern states would
never  accept  the Constitution  if it  interfered with
slavery. Thus, in  order  to  create  the  badly  needed
new  government, the  Founders  compromised  on

See the following footnoted materials in the Reference Handbook:
1. The Constitution, pages 774 –799. 

CHAPTER 2: ORIGINS OF AMERICAN GOVERNMENT 55

053-061 CH02S4-860053  12/1/04  1:34 AM  Page 56

the  slavery  question. Their  refusal  to  deal  w ith
slavery  left  it  to  later  generations  of Americans  to
resolve this great and terrible issue.
Other  Compromises The  delegates  compro-
mised on several other issues to complete the Con-
stitution. The  debate  over  how  to  elect  the
president included the election of the president di-
rectly by the people, by Congress, and by state leg-
islatures. The  present  Electoral College  system, in
which each state selects electors to choose the pres-
ident, was finally agreed to as a compromise. Sim-
ilarly,
the  president’s  four-year  term  was  a
compromise between those wanting a longer term
and  those who  feared  a  long  term would  give  the
president too much power.
On  September  8, 1787, a Committee  of Style
and Arrangements began polishing the final draft.
By September 17 the document was ready. Thirty-
nine delegates stepped forward to sign the Consti-
tution. The  aging  Ben  Franklin  had  to  be  helped 
to  the  table  to  sign. As  others went  up  to  sign, he 

Rising sun chair, 
Constitutional 
Convention

56 CHAPTER 2: ORIGINS OF AMERICAN GOVERNMENT

remarked that during the long debates he had often
looked  at  the  sun  painted  on  the  back  of General
Washington’s  chair  and wondered whether  it was
rising  or  setting. “[B]ut  now  at  length  I  have  the
happiness  to know,” he said, “it  is a rising and not
a setting Sun.”

Ratifying the Constitution
For  the new Constitution  to become  law, 9
of the 13 states had to ratify it. The political
debate over  ratification  lasted until May 29, 1790,
when Rhode Island finally voted for approval. The
Constitution, however, actually went into effect on
June  21, 1788, when New Hampshire  became  the
ninth  state to ratify it.
The  Federalists  and  Anti-Federalists
The  great  debate  over  ratification  quickly  divided
the people in the states. Fervent debates broke out
in  the newspapers. One group, known as  the Fed-
eralists, favored  the Constitution  and was  led  by
many of the Founders. Their support came main-
ly  from  merchants  and  others  in  the  cities  and
coastal  regions. The  other  group, called  the Anti-
Federalists, opposed  the  new Constitution. They
drew support  largely  from  the  inland  farmers and
laborers, who  feared  a  strong  national  govern-
ment. The  lines  of suppor t, however, were  not
clearly drawn, and many  city  and business people
agreed with the opponents of the Constitution.
The Anti-Federalists  criticized  the Constitu-
tion  for  hav ing  been  drafted  in  secrecy. They
claimed  the  document was  extralegal, not  sanc-
tioned by  law, since  the Convention had been  au-
thorized  only  to  rev ise  the  old  Ar ticles. They
further  argued  that  the Constitution  took  impor-
tant powers from the states.
The Anti-Federalists’ strongest argument, how-
ever, was  that  the  Constitution  lacked  a  Bill  of
Rights. The Convention had  considered  including
such a bill. However, the delegates decided  that  the
inclusion was not needed because the Constitution
did not  give  the  government power  to  violate  the
people’s rights. Anti-Federalists warned that without
a Bill of Rights, a strong national government might
take away the human rights won in the Revolution.
They demanded  that  the new Constitution  clearly
guarantee the people’s freedoms. Patrick Henry was
a strong opponent of the Constitution. He stated:

053-061 CH02S4-860053  12/1/04  1:34 AM  Page 57

 Ratifying the Constitution
Ratifying the Constitution

“ The necessity of a Bill of
Rights appears to me to be
greater in this government
than ever it was in any gov-
ernment before. . . . All rights
not expressly and unequivo-
cally reserved to the people
are impliedly and incidental-
ly relinquished to rulers. . . .
If you intend to reserve your
unalienable rights, you must
have the most express stipu-
lation; for . . . if the people 
do not think it necessary to
reserve them, they will 
supposed to be given up. ”
—Patrick Henry, 1788
The  Federalists, on  the  other
hand, argued  that without  a  strong
national  government, anarchy, or
political  disorder, would  triumph.
They claimed that only a strong na-
tional government could protect the
new  nation  from  enemies  abroad
and  solve   the  country’s   internal
problems. They  also  claimed  that  a
Bill  of Rights was  not  needed  since
eight states already had such bills in
their state constitutions. To gain the
necessary  suppor t, however, the
Federalists promised to add a Bill of
Rights  as  the  first  order  of business
under a new government.
Progress Toward Ratification
With  the promise of a Bill of Rights,
the tide turned in favor of the Consti-
tution. Many  small  states  ratified  it
quickly  because  they  were  pleased
with  equal  representation  in  the new
Senate. Although  the  Constitution
went  into  effect  when  New  Hamp-
shire ratified it, Virginia and New York had not voted
for approval. In Virginia, George Washington, James
Madison, and  Edmund  Randolph  helped  swing  a
close vote on June 25, 1788. In New York, Alexander
Hamilton  argued  the  case  for  six  weeks. Finally,
on  July  26, the  Federalists  in  New  York  won  by 
only three votes.

Unanimously ratified
Strongly supported 
ratification
Substantially opposed 
ratification
Ratified after the 
Constitution became 
fully effective

*Ratification was 
  originally defeated; 
  date represents 
  second vote.

MASSACHUSETTS
Feb. 6, 1788

NEW YORK
July 26, 1788

NEW 
HAMPSHIRE
June 21, 1788

RHODE 
ISLAND
May 29, 1790

PENNSYLVANIA
Dec. 12, 1787

CONNECTICUT
Jan. 9, 1788

VIRGINIA
June 25, 1788

NEW JERSEY
Dec. 18, 1787

DELAWARE
Dec. 7, 1787

NORTH CAROLINA
Nov. 21, 1789*

MARYLAND
April 28, 1788

SOUTH CAROLINA
May 23, 1788

GEORGIA
Jan. 2, 1788

N

A t l a n t i c
O c e a n

0

0

200 miles

200 kilometers

Critical Thinking
 
 
   The Constitution survived strong 
opposition from a number of the original 13 states. 
Why were some states hesitant to ratify the Constitution?

To help win the battle in New York, Hamilton,
Madison, and John Jay published more than 80 es-
says  defending  the  new Constitution. Later  they
were collected in a book called The Federalist. 1

See the following footnoted materials in the Reference Handbook:
1. The Federalist, No. 10, pages 812 –814 and 
The Federalist, No. 51,  pages 815 –816. 

CHAPTER 2: ORIGINS OF AMERICAN GOVERNMENT 57

053-061 CH02S4-860053  12/1/04  1:35 AM  Page 58

The Constitutional Debate

Choosing Sides The woodcut
shows the “Ship of State”
being paraded by Federalists in
support of the Constitution. The
portrait is of Patrick Henry, an
outspoken Anti-Federalist. 
Analyze The Federalist,
Hamilton’s argument for the
Constitution, and the Anti-
Federalists’ argument against it.

Patrick
Henry

Launching a New State With ratification by
Virginia  and  New  York, the  new  government
began, with New York City as  the nation’s  tempo-
rary capital. George Washington was elected presi-
dent and John Adams vice president. Voters elected
22  senators  and  59  representatives, and on March
4, 1789, Congress met  for  the  first  time  in Federal
Hall  in New York. On April  30 Washington  took

the  oath  of office  to  become  the  first  president  of
the United States.
To  fulfill  the  promises made  during  the  fight
for ratification, James Madison introduced a set of
amendments during  the  first  session of Congress.
Congress approved 12 amendments and the states
ratified 10 of them in 1791. These first 10 amend-
ments became known as the Bill of Rights.

S e c t i o n   4   A s s e s s m e n t
S e c t i o n   4   A s s e s s m e n t

Connecticut Compromise

Checking for Understanding
1. Main Idea In a graphic organizer similar to the
one at the right, analyze
how the Connecticut 
Compromise provided 
fair treatment for both 
large and small states.
2. Define interstate commerce, extralegal, anarchy.
3. Identify Father of the Constitution, Patrick Henry.
4. Identify the key issues on which the delegates to
the Constitutional Convention agreed.
5. Who were the authors of The Federalist and what
was the purpose for writing it?

Small states . . .

Large states . . .

Critical Thinking
6. Analyzing Information Evaluate the impact of
the Federalists and Anti-Federalists on the
Constitution.

Civil Liberties The Bill of Rights, important in
the ratification of the Constitution, continues
to be a strong foundation of the American po-
litical system. Analyze civil liberties issues in
the news. Write a short news article about why
the Bill of Rights is important today.

58 CHAPTER 2: ORIGINS OF AMERICAN GOVERNMENT

053-061 CH02S4-860053  12/1/04  1:35 AM  Page 59

Interpreting Points of View
Suppose you want to see a new movie, but
your friends’ opinions range from “terrific”
to “boring.” People often have different
opinions about the same people, events, or
issues because they  look at them from different
points of view.

Learning the Skill

A point of view results from one’s own beliefs
and values. Many factors affect an individual’s
point of view, including age, gender, racial or
ethnic background, economic class, and religion.
To judge the accuracy or the objectivity of an 
argument, you must first identify the speaker’s
point of view.
To interpret point of view in written material,
gather background information on the author that
might reveal his or her point of view. Identify
aspects of the topic that the author chooses to em-
phasize or exclude. Look for emotionally charged
words such as charming, vicious, heartwarming,
and drastic. Also notice metaphors and analogies
that imply an opinion, such as, “If this budget can
work, then pigs can fly.”

Practicing the Skill 

Read the following excerpt from James 
Madison’s The Federalist, No. 10. Then answer 
the questions that follow.

From this view of the subject it may be concluded
that a pure democracy, by which I mean a society
consisting of a small number of citizens, who assemble
and administer the government in person, can admit
of no cure for the mischiefs of faction.
. . . Hence it is that such democracies have ever
been spectacles of turbulence and contention; have

ever been found incompatible with personal security
or the rights of property; and have in general been as
short in their lives as they have been violent in their
deaths. . . .
A republic, by which I mean a government in
which the scheme of representation takes place, opens
a different prospect, and promises the cure for which
we are seeking.
1. What subject is Madison addressing? For what
group is he speaking?
2. What is Madison’s point of view?
3. What emotionally charged words and phrases
reveal Madison’s point of view?

Application Activity
Application Activity
In a newspaper or magazine, find an
editorial or letter to the editor that expresses 
a point of view on an issue. Write a paragraph
analyzing the author’s point of view. Compare
it to your own and explain why you agree or
disagree with the author.

59

053-061 CH02S4-860053  12/1/04  1:36 AM  Page 60

Self-Check Quiz Visit the United States Government:
Democracy  in Action Web site at gov.glencoe.com and
click on Chapter 2–Self-Check Quizzes to prepare  for
the chapter test.

Reviewing Key Terms
Write a paragraph that summarizes the key points
of this chapter. Use all of the following terms.

1. limited government
2. cede
3. representative 
government
4. revenue

GOVERNMENT

C h a p t e r   2
C h a p t e r   2
Assessment and Activities
Recalling Facts
1. Identify  three key  ideas  found  in  the English
Bill of Rights.
2. According  to John Locke, what  fundamental 
element made government  legitimate?
3. Describe  the practices established by colonial
governments  that became a basic part of our
system of government.
4. What  tasks did  the Second Continental
Congress accomplish?
5. Why was  the Declaration of  Independence 
a  revolutionary document?
6. What achievements were made under  the 
Articles of Confederation?
7. State  the position of small states  in  the
debate over  representation  in Congress.
8. What  issue did  the Convention delegates
refuse  to settle  in 1787?
Understanding Concepts 
1. Growth of Democracy Analyze  the  impact of  the
English political heritage on  the United States
and  its  importance  to  the Declaration of
Independence.
2. Federalism In your opinion, why were  the 
Articles of Confederation an unworkable or 
unrealistic plan of government?
3. Civil Liberties Why did  the Anti-Federalists 
insist on a Bill of Rights?
Critical Thinking
1. Understanding Cause and Effect Use a graphic
organizer  like  the one below  to analyze  the
cause  for each effect  listed.
Cause

5. ratify
6. anarchy
7. ordinance
8. interstate commerce

Effect
a strong central government
compromises  in the
Constitution
2. Synthesizing  Information How do you account
for the contradiction between the constitutional
acceptance of slavery and  the  ideals set  forth
in both  the Declaration of  Independence and
the Constitution?

English Traditions
• The Magna Carta established principle of limited government
• The English Bill of Rights limited the powers of the monarch
• House of Commons exemplified representative government

Colonial Independence
• Declaration of Independence  formally separated colonies
from England
• Articles of Confederation emphasized state governments
over a strong federal government

New Constitutional Government
• New government balanced need for strong central 
government with continued state power
• Inclusion of Bill of Rights ensured ratification of new
government

C h a p t e r   2
C h a p t e r   2

Interpreting Political Cartoons Activity

053-061 CH02S4-860053  12/1/04  1:36 AM  Page 61

Analyzing Primary
Sources
Inspired by the American Revo-
lution, French Revolutionaries
declared war on the crown in
1789. They created a written
document similar to the U.S.
Declaration of Independence,
specifying the rights for which
French citizens were fighting.
Read the excerpt and answer
the questions that follow.

“Approved by the National 
Assembly of France, 
August 26, 1789 

1. What symbol represents the colonies in this 1779 
political cartoon?
2. Who do you think the rider on the horse is?
3. What is the message of this cartoon?

The representatives of the French
people, organized as a National
Assembly, believing that the igno-
rance, neglect, or contempt of the
rights of man are the sole cause of
public calamities and of the corrup-
tion of governments, have deter-
mined to set forth in a solemn
declaration the natural, unalienable,
and sacred rights of man . . . in order
that the grievances of the citizens, based hereafter upon sim-
ple and incontestable principles, shall tend to the mainte-
nance of the constitution and redound to the happiness of
all. Therefore the National Assembly recognizes and proclaims . . .
the following rights of man and of the citizen: 
Articles:
1. Men are born and remain free and equal in rights. . . .
2. The aim of all political association is the preservation
of the natural and imprescriptible rights of man. These
rights are liberty, property, security, and resistance to 
oppression. 
3. The principle of all sovereignty resides essentially 
in the nation. No body nor individual may exercise any
authority which does not proceed directly from the nation.”

1. How  is  the preamble  to  this document similar
to  the U.S. Declaration of  Independence? 
2. Why do you  think French Revolutionaries used
the Declaration of  Independence as a model
for  their own document? 

Applying Technology Skills
Using Software Programs Newspaper car-
toons were important tools to stir public opinion
against Great Britain at the time of the Revolution. 
Use software clip art to create a political cartoon
that might have appeared in a colonial newspaper. 
The cartoon should illustrate the colonists’ feelings
toward Britain.

Participating  in 
Local Government
Investigate the history of your local
government. Visit local government
offices to find out about your commu-
nity’s origins and early leaders. Describe
how the government grew and changed over the
years. Prepare a brochure about the early 
governments of your community with the class.

CHAPTER 2: ORIGINS OF AMERICAN GOVERNMENT 61

