062-067 CH03S1-860053  12/1/04  1:37 AM  Page 62

Protecting Your Rights How 
well do you know your rights? What
constitutional protections do you enjoy
as a United States citizen? Few people
know the Constitution very well, yet 
we all rely on its provisions to ensure 
a stable government that works within
defined limits.

To learn more about how 
the Constitution is a relevant
document that protects your rights
today, view the Democracy in Action
Chapter 3 video lesson: 

The Constitution—A Living Document

★       ★       ★       ★       ★       ★       ★       ★       ★       ★

GOVERNMENT

Chapter Overview Visit the United States
Government: Democracy  in Action Web site
at gov.glencoe.com and click on Chapter
3—Overview to preview chapter  information.

62

062-067 CH03S1-860053  12/1/04  1:38 AM  Page 63

S e c t i o n   1
S e c t i o n   1
Structure and Principles
The  Founders  created  the  Constitution
Reader’s Guide
more  than  200  years  ago. Like  Mon-
tesquieu, they believed  in  a  separation of
powers. They divided the  federal govern-
ment  into  legislative, executive, and  judicial
branches. The Constitution established a republic,
in which power  is held by voting  citizens  through
their  elected  representatives. It  provides  citizens
w ith  information  about  their  rights  and  about
what  they may  reasonably  expect of their  govern-
ment. The  success  of this  system  of government
depends  on  an  informed, participating  citizenry.
An understanding of the Constitution is key to un-
derstanding  the  structure  and  daily  function  of
American government.

Key Terms
article, jurisdiction, supremacy clause, amendment,
popular sovereignty, federalism, separation of 
powers, checks and balances, veto, judicial review
Find Out
■ What  is  the basic structure of  the Constitution?
■ How did  the Founders hope  to prevent any one
branch of government  from gaining  too much
power?
Understanding Concepts
Constitutional Interpretations What beliefs and
principles in the Constitution help to build a na-
tional identity for the United States? 

Book  Banned
PAR IS ,   FRANCE ,   1 7 5 1
A b o o k   b y   a   F r e n c h   n o b l e
i s   a t t r a c t i n g   a t t e n t i o n
an d   con t rove r s y. In   T h e   S p i r -
i t   o f L aw s , p u b l i s h e d   t h r e e
y e a r s   a g o , C h a r l e s - L o u i s   d e
S e con d a t , t h e  b a ro n  d e  Mon -
t e s q u i e u , p r o p o s e d   d i v i d i n g
p o l i t i c a l   a u t h o r i t y   i n to   e xe c -
u t ive , l e g i s l a t ive , a n d   j u d i c i a l
p ow e r s . Mon t e s q u i e u   a r g u e d
t h a t   a s s i g n i n g   e a c h   s e t   o f
p ow e r s   t o   a   s e p a r a t e   b r a n c h
o f g o v e r nm e n t   w o u l d   p r o -
m o t e   l i b e r t y. A l t h o u g h   h i s
b o o k   h a s   s u p p o r t e r s   i n   E n g -
l a n d  a n d  Am e r i c a , i t  h a s  b e e n
h a r s h l y   a t t a c ke d   t h ro u g h o u t   Eu rop e .

The Spirit of Laws
b o o k

▲

The Constitution on display at the National Archives

Structure
Compared with  the  constitutions  of other
countries, the United States Constitution  is
simple  and  brief. It  establishes  the  structure  and
powers of government but does not spell out every
aspect  of how  government  w ill  function. The
Founders  w isely  left  it  to  future  generations  to
work out such details as the need arose. The Con-
stitution contains about 7,000 words and is divid-
ed  into  three  parts—the  Preamble, the  articles,
and  the  amendments  (for  the  entire  text, see  the
Reference Handbook, pages 774–799).
The  Preamble The  Preamble, or  introduc-
tion, states why the Constitution was written. In
the  Preamble, the  Founders  indicated  that  they
wanted a government that would provide stabil-
ity and order, protect citizens’ liberties, and serve
the people:
“ To form a more perfect Union, establish
Justice, insure domestic Tranquility, pro-
vide for the common defence, promote the
general Welfare, and secure the Blessings 
of Liberty. ”
CHAPTER 3: THE CONSTITUTION 63

—The Preamble

062-067 CH03S1-860053  12/1/04  1:38 AM  Page 64

Seven Articles The Constitution contains seven
divisions called articles. Each article covers a general
topic. For  example, Articles  I, II, and  III  create
the three branches of the national government—the
legislative, executive, and  judicial branches. Most of
the articles are divided into sections.
Ar ticle  I  establishes  the  legislative  branch.
Section 1 of Article I creates the United States Con-
gress. Sections  2  and  3  set  forth  details  about  the
two houses of Congress—the House of Represen-
tatives  and  the  Senate. Other  sections  of Article  I
spell  out  the  procedures  for making  laws, list  the
types  of laws Congress may  pass, and  specify  the
powers that Congress does not have.
Article  II  creates  an  executive  branch  to  carry
out  laws  passed  by Congress. Article  II, Section  1,
begins: “The  executive  Power  shall  be  vested  in  a
President  of the United  States  of America.” This
section and those that follow detail the powers and
duties of the presidency, describe qualifications for
the  office  and  procedures  for  electing  the  presi-
dent, and provide for a vice president.

Ar ticle  III, Section  1, establishes  a  Supreme
Court to head the judicial branch. The section also
gives the national government the power to create
lower  federal  courts. Section  2  outlines  the  juris-
diction, or  the  authority, of the  Supreme Court
and other federal courts to rule on cases. Section 3
defines treason against the United States.
Ar ticle  IV  explains  the  relationship  of the
states  to  one  another  and  to  the  national  govern-
ment. This  article  requires  each  state  to  give  citi-
zens  of other  states  the  same  rights  as  its  own
citizens, addresses admitting new states, and guar-
antees  that  the  national  government will  protect
the states against invasion or domestic violence.
Article V spells out the ways that the Constitu-
tion can be amended, or changed. Article VI contains
the  supremacy  clause, establishing  that  the Con-
stitution, laws  passed  by   Congress, and  treaties 
of the United  States “shall  be  the  supreme  Law  of
the  Land.” Finally, Article VII  addresses  ratification
and declares that the Constitution would take effect
after it was ratified by nine states.

Rights and Freedoms

Foundations of Personal Liberties
Foundations of Personal Liberties
Virginia 
English 
Declaration 
Bill of 
of Rights 
Rights 
(1776)
(1689)

Magna 
Carta
(1215)

Bill of 
Rights
(1791)

Trial by jury

Due process

Private property

No unreasonable searches or seizures

No cruel punishment

No excessive bail or fines

Right to bear arms

Right to petition

Freedom of speech

Freedom of the press

Freedom of religion

Critical Thinking
 
 
   The above documents granted many liberties at the time they were written; 
however, these rights were not applied equally to everyone. Which three categories of rights were 
extended by all four documents?

64 CHAPTER 3: THE CONSTITUTION

062-067 CH03S1-860053  12/1/04  1:38 AM  Page 65

The Amendments The third part of the Con-
stitution consists of amendments, or changes. The
Constitution has been amended 27 times through-
out  the  nation’s  history. The  amendment  process
provides  a way  this document, written more  than
two  centuries  ago, can  remain  responsive   to  the
needs of a changing nation.

Major Principles
The Constitution rests on six major princi-
ples of government: (1) popular sovereign-
ty ; (2)  federalism; (3)  separation  of powers; (4)
checks  and  balances; (5)  judicial  review ; and  (6)
limited  government. These  principles  continue  to
influence the character of American government.
Popular  Sovereignty The  Constitution  is
based on the concept of popular sovereignty—rule
by  the people. United  States  government  is  based
upon the consent of the governed; the authority for
government flows from the people.
Federalism The  terms  federalism and  federal
system describe  the  basic  structure  of American
government. These  terms  should not  be  confused
w ith  the  term   federal  government, a  phrase  that
simply refers to the national government in Wash-
ington, D.C.
The Constitution  created  a  federal  system  of
government. Under  federalism, power  is  divided
between  national  and  state  governments. Both 
levels  have   their  own  agencies  and  officials, and
pass laws that directly affect citizens.
Why  did  the  Founders  create  such  a  complex
system  of government? Why  did  they  choose  fed-
eralism instead of a unitary form of government in
which  the  central  government  has  all major  gov-
erning  powers?  In  1787  there  really  seemed  to  be
no  other  choice. The weak  union  created  by   the
Ar ticles  of Confederation1 had  not  worked, yet
people remained afraid  to give all power  to a cen-
tral government. Federalism represented a middle
ground—a way  to  forge  a  union  but  limit  central
power by distributing authority between the states
and the national government. Federalism gives the
United  States  a  flexible  system  of government

See the following footnoted materials in the Reference Handbook:
1. The Articles of Confederation, pages 808–811. 

Major Principles of 
Major Principles of 
the Constitution
the Constitution

Popular Sovereignty
People are the source of government power.

Federalism
In this governmental system, power is divided 
between national and state governments.

Separation of Powers
Each of the three branches of government 
has its own responsibilities.

Checks and Balances
Each branch of government holds some 
control over the other two branches.

Judicial Review
Courts have power to declare laws and 
actions of Congress and the president 
unconstitutional.

Limited Government 
The Constitution limits the powers of 
government by making explicit grants of 
authority.

Critical Thinking
 
 
   The principles outlined in 
the Constitution were the Framers’ solution 
to the complex problems of a representative 
government. Which principle allows the 
president to veto legislation? 

under  which  the  national  government  has  the
power to act for the country as a whole, and states
have power over many local matters.
Separation  of  Powers The  Constitution
limits  the  central  government  by  dividing  power
among  the  legislative, executive, and  judicial
branches. Under  separation  of powers, each
branch  has  its  responsibilities, a  system  that  the
Founders  hoped would  prevent  any  branch  from
gaining too much power.
Checks  and  Balances To  the  principle  of
separation of powers the Founders added a system
of checks  and  balances, whereby  each  branch  of
government  exercises  some  control  over  the  oth-
ers. This system works in several ways.

CHAPTER 3: THE CONSTITUTION 65

062-067 CH03S1-860053  12/1/04  1:38 AM  Page 66

System of Checks and Balances
System of Checks and Balances

Congress can impeach judges, create 
lower federal cour ts and fix their 
jurisdictions, set the size of the Supreme 
Cour t, and determine judicial salaries.
Senate confirms judges.

Cour ts can interpret 
congressional 
statutes and declare 
acts of Congress 
unconstitutional.

CONGRESS
Legislative function
Congress passes the laws that create 
executive agencies and the programs 
they administer, and it can over ride 
presidential vetoes by a two-thirds vote 
of both chambers and can impeach the 
president.
Senate ratifies treaties and confirms 
presidential appointments to the 
executive branch and the cour ts.

COURTS
Judicial function

Cour ts can declare
presidential actions
unconstitutional and 
can determine
whether the executive
branch is properly
administering laws
passed by Congress.

President 
nominates 
federal judges 
and may enforce 
cour t orders.

President can recommend legislation to 
Congress, veto bills passed by Congress,
and implement laws passed by Congress.

PRESIDENT
Executive function

Critical Thinking
                             The principle of checks and balances prevents one branch of government 
from becoming too powerful. In what ways does Congress check the Supreme Court?

Congress, for  example, passes  laws. The  presi-
dent  can  check Congress  by  rejecting—vetoing—
its legislation. This veto power is balanced, however,
by the power of Congress to override the veto by a
two-thirds  vote  of each  house. The  federal  courts
restrain Congress by ruling on the constitutionality
of laws. This  power  of the  judicial  branch  is  bal-
anced by the power of the president to appoint fed-
eral  judges. This presidential power  is balanced, in
turn, by  the  Constitution’s  requirement  that  the
Senate approve appointments. Checks and balances
created a system of shared powers.

66 CHAPTER 3: THE CONSTITUTION

Judicial Review The power of the courts to de-
clare  laws  and  actions  of local, state, or  national
governments  invalid  if they  violate  the Constitu-
tion  is  called  judicial  rev iew. All  federal  cour ts
have this power, but the Supreme Court is the final
authority on the meaning and the interpretation of
the Constitution. Because  the Constitution  is  the
supreme law of the land, acts contrary to it must be
void.
The  Founders  did  not  explicitly  give   such
power  to   the  judicial  branch. Ar ticle  III of the
Constitution, however, states  that  “the  judicial

062-067 CH03S1-860053  12/1/04  1:38 AM  Page 67

Constitutional Safeguards

power shall extend  to all cases  . . . aris-
ing  under  this  Constitution.” The
Supreme Court in the case of Marbury
v. Madison 1 in  1803    established  the
precedent  for  federal  courts  to  rule 
on the actions of the government.
The principle  of judicial  review  is
important. A Supreme Court decision
on  the  meaning  of the  Constitution
can be changed only if the Court itself
changes  its views or  if an amendment
to the Constitution is passed.
Limited Government The princi-
ple  of limited  government means  that
the Constitution  limits  the  actions  of
government by specifically listing pow-
ers it does and does not have. The first
10  amendments  set  specific  limits  in
the  areas  of freedom  of expression,
personal security, and fair trials.
The Constitution safeguards the na-
tion against abuse of power. In 1974 when President
Richard Nixon  resigned  in  the  face of evidence  that
he had acted illegally, President Gerald Ford said:
“My fellow Americans, our long national
nightmare is over. Our Constitution works.
Our great Republic is a government of laws
and not of men. Here the people rule. ”
—Gerald Ford, 1974
S e c t i o n   1   A s s e s s m e n t
S e c t i o n   1   A s s e s s m e n t

“It works!”

Checks and Balances The public disclosure of President
Nixon’s involvement in the Watergate scandal led Congress
and the Supreme Court to assert their constitutional powers.
Explain how the constitutional system of checks and
balances supports the theory of separation of powers.

Although the democratic principles that Pres-
ident  Ford  cited  have  existed  for more  than  200
years, the Constitution  as  it  is  consistently  imple-
mented  remains  a  flexible  and  dynamic  instru-
ment for meeting the changing needs of American
government.

See the following footnoted materials in the Reference Handbook:
1. Marbury v. Madison case summary, page 761. 

Federal 
Government

Checking for Understanding
1. Main Idea Using a graphic 
organizer like the one to 
the right, show how the 
Constitution divides the 
powers of the federal 
government.
2. Define article, jurisdiction, supremacy clause,
amendment, popular sovereignty, federalism,
separation of powers, checks and balances,
veto, judicial review.
3. Identify Marbury v. Madison.
4. What are the six underlying principles of the 
Constitution?

Critical Thinking
5. Analyzing Information What is the relationship
between the principles of federalism and the
separation of powers as suggested by
Montesquieu and detailed in the Constitution? 

Constitutional Interpretations As set out in
the Constitution, the principle of checks and
balances helps to limit the power of govern-
ment. Create a diagram showing how a system
of checks and balances is provided for in your
local government.

CHAPTER 3: THE CONSTITUTION 67

068-075 CH03S2-860053  12/1/04  1:38 AM  Page 68

Key Terms
expressed powers, enumerated powers, elastic
clause, federal bureaucracy
Find Out
■ Why did  the Constitution specifically describe
the powers of Congress, but  remain vague
about  the powers of  the president?
■ Which of  the  three branches of  federal govern-
ment seems  to have  the most power  today? 
Understanding Concepts
Separation of Powers What is the chief function 
of each of the three branches of the federal 
government?

S e c t i o n   2
S e c t i o n   2
Three Branches of Government
Article I of the Constitution created a  leg-
Reader’s Guide
islature of two houses: the Senate and the
House  of Representatives. The  House
was to be the voice of the people, chosen
by popular vote. The Senate represented the broad
interests  of entire  states, and  senators were  origi-
nally  chosen  by  their  state  legislatures. Qualifica-
tions  for  senators were more  rigorous  than  those
for members of the House. Yet, in many ways, the
House and Senate had equal powers.
Article II created the executive branch of gov-
ernment. The presidency was an entirely new con-
cept  in  1787, and  the  need  for  the  office  of the
president was hotly debated by  the Founders. The
provisions for a four-year term, appointment pow-
ers, control of the armed forces, and foreign policy
decisions were the result of compromises. A presi-
dent  w ith  specified, limited  powers  was  fur ther
guarded by an impeachment clause.
Article III established the judicial branch. The
Constitution  established  only  one  cour t—the
Supreme Court. It gave Congress authority  to  set
up additional courts as the need arose. In recogni-
tion  of the  already  operating  state  cour ts, the
Constitution  limited  federal  jurisdiction  to  cases
arising  under  the Constitution, the  laws  of the
United  States, or  to  controversies  that went out-
side the jurisdiction of state courts.

The Legislative Branch
The Founders attached great importance
to  lawmaking  and  expected Congress  to
become  the most  important  branch  of the  na-
tional  government. At  the  same  time, however,
they  feared  the  abuse  of power. Their  experi-
ence  w ith  the  Br itish  Parliament  had  shown
that  legislatures with  unchecked  powers  could
pass repressive laws and endanger liberty. Con-
sequently, the  powers  they  gave Congress, un-
like  those  enjoyed  by  the  president  and  the
Supreme Court, are expressed powers, powers
directly stated in the Constitution.

Cour t  Says  No   to  Nixon
WASH INGTON ,  D .C . ,   JULY 1 9 7 4
T h e   S u p r em e   C o u r t
t h a t
t o d a y  
r u l e d  
P r e s i d e n t   R i c h a r d   M .
N i xo n   m u s t   s u r r e n d e r
t h a t
r e c o r d i n g s  
t a p e  
h a v e   l o n g   b e e n   s o u g h t
by   t h e  Ho u s e   a n d  S e n a t e
c omm i t t e e s
j u d i c i a r y  
i n v e s t i g a t i n g   t h e   1 9 7 2
A   p l e a   f o r   t h e   t r u t h
b r e a k - i n   a t   D em o c r a t i c
Pa r t y   h e a d q u a r t e r s . T h e
j u s t i c e s   r e j e c t e d   8 - 0   t h e   p r e s i d e n t ’s   a r g um e n t   t h a t
r e co rd in g s   o f O v a l  O f f i c e   conve r s a t i on s   a r e   p ro t e c t -
e d   by   e xe c u t ive   p r iv i l e g e   a n d   by   t h e   d o c t r i n e   o f s e p -
a r a t i on  o f p ow e r s . T h e  Co u r t  o rd e r e d  N i xon   to   t u r n
ove r   t h e   t a p e s   to  Wa t e r g a t e   s p e c i a l   p ro s e c u to r   L e o n
Jawo r s k i . I t   i s   w i d e l y   b e l i e ve d   t h a t   t h e   t a p e s   con t a i n
e v i d e n c e   o f t h e   p r e s i d e n t ’s   i nvo l vem e n t   i n   a   co ve r-
u p   o f t h e   b r e a k - in .

68 CHAPTER 3: THE CONSTITUTION

068-075 CH03S2-860053  12/1/04  1:39 AM  Page 69

Seats of Governmental Power

Present The U.S. Capitol, located on
Capitol Hill, is one of the nation’s most 
familiar landmarks. It contains the current
Senate and House chambers.

▲

Past The first seat of Congress contained
many symbols, such as an 
American eagle insignia and
13 arrows and the olive
branch united, to mark it as
a federal building.
▲

Symbols of Government
What does the U.S. 
Capitol symbolize to
you?

Enumerated  Powers Most  of the  expressed
powers  of Congress  are  itemized  in Article  I, Sec-
tion  8. These  powers  are  also  called  enumerated
powers because  they  are  numbered  1–18. Five
enumerated  powers  deal w ith  economic  legisla-
tion—the power to levy taxes, to borrow money, to
regulate commerce, to coin money, and  to punish
counterfeiting. Seven  enumerated powers provide
for  defense—the  power  to  punish  piracies, to  de-
clare  war, to  raise  and  suppor t  armed  forces, to
provide a navy, to regulate the armed forces, to call
forth the militia, and to organize the militia. In ad-
dition to these powers, Section 8 provides for nat-
uralizing  citizens, establishing  post  offices,
securing  patents  and  copyrights, establishing
courts, and governing the District of Columbia.
The  final  enumerated  power  is  the  so-called
elastic clause. This clause gives Congress the right
to make  all  laws “necessary  and  proper” to  carry
out  the  powers  expressed  in  the  other  clauses  of
Article I. It is called the elastic clause because it lets
Congress “stretch” its powers to meet situations the
Founders could never have anticipated.
What does  the phrase “necessary  and proper”
in the elastic clause mean? Almost from the begin-
ning, this phrase was a subject of dispute. The issue

was whether  a  strict  or  a  broad  interpretation  of
the Constitution  should  be  applied. The  dispute
was  first  addressed  in 1819, in  the  case of McCul-
loch v. Maryland,1 when the Supreme Court ruled
in favor of a broad interpretation. The Court sup-
ported  the  idea  that  the  elastic  clause  gave Con-
gress the right to make any laws necessary to carry
out its other powers.
Congress  Then  and Now The  first home of
Congress was  Federal Hall  in  lower Manhattan,
New York. (It moved to Philadelphia near the end
of the  second  year, 1790.)  The House met  down-
stairs; the  Senate, on  the  upper  floor. Under  the 
direction  of Speaker  Fredrick A. Muhlenberg, the
House  named  a  committee  to  establish  rules  and
procedures. As  soon  as  the  Senate  had  its  twelfth
member—a quorum—it informed the House that
it was  ready  for  a  joint  session  to  count  the  elec-
toral votes. House members climbed the stairs and
helped  count  the  electoral  votes  that  named
George Washington  and  John  Adams  president
and vice president.

See the following footnoted materials in the Reference Handbook:
1. McCulloch v. Maryland case summary, page 761. 

CHAPTER 3: THE CONSTITUTION 69

068-075 CH03S2-860053  12/1/04  1:39 AM  Page 70

A Strong Executive

Modern Entanglements
George Washington warned fu-
ture presidents to avoid foreign
entanglements. In 1990, though,
President George Bush persuad-
ed other nations to join Opera-
tion Desert Shield to free Kuwait
from invading Iraqi forces. In
today’s world, do you think
that it is possible for Ameri-
can presidents to avoid for-
eign entanglements?
Why or why not?

1992 Bush
campaign
button

Once  the  structure  of the House  and  Senate
was  in place, each body began  to work on  legisla-
tion. By  1795, four  permanent  committees  had
formed. In  the  first  Congress, the  Senate  intro-
duced only 24 bills, and the House introduced 143.
By comparison, today a  total of about 10,000 bills
are introduced yearly.
Attendance  in  legislative  sessions was  only  a
part-time  job  for many years. Members had other
jobs or were wealthy enough not to work. Congress
did  not  sit  in  continuous  session  until  the mid-
twentieth century. Today members of Congress live
and work nearly year-round in Washington, D.C.

The Executive Branch
The office of the presidency was  initiated  in
response  to  the weakness  of the Articles  of
Confederation. It was significant that the office was
described  in  the  second, not  the  first, article  of the
Constitution. Like  those  of Congress, presidential
responsibilities and powers have grown enormous-
ly since George Washington took office in 1789.
Vague  Constitutional  Powers The  presi-
dent is head of the executive branch. The Founders
recognized the need for a strong executive to carry

70 CHAPTER 3: THE CONSTITUTION

out  the  acts  of Congress. They  also  distrusted 
direct  par ticipation  by  the  people  in  decision 
making, fearing that mass democratic movements
might  try  to  redistribute  personal  proper ty.
The executive branch, they believed, could protect
liberty, private property, and business. The execu-
tive branch could also hold  the actions of the  leg-
islative branch in check.
The Constitution  grants  the  president  broad
but vaguely described powers. The  exact meaning
of the  president’s  power  in  specific  situations  is
open  to  interpretation. Article  II 1 begins  simply
by stating: “The executive Power shall be vested in
a President of the United States of America.” Some
scholars  call  this  sentence  the “wild  card” in  the
deck  of presidential  powers. What  they mean  is
that  this  sentence may be “played,” or  interpreted,
in  different ways, like  a wild  card  in  a  card  game.
For example, under the executive power, the presi-
dent can fire officials in the executive branch, make
agreements  w ith  foreign  nations, or  take  emer-
gency actions to save the nation, even though none
of these  powers  is  specifically mentioned  in  the
Constitution.

See the following footnoted materials in the Reference Handbook:
1. The Constitution, pages 774 –799. 

068-075 CH03S2-860053  12/1/04  1:39 AM  Page 71

Specific Powers Sections 2 and 3 of Article II
do define some presidential powers. The president
(1) is commander in chief of the armed forces and
the  state militias  (National Guard) when  they  are
called into service; (2) appoints—with the Senate’s
consent—heads of executive departments (such as
the Department of Labor); (3) may pardon people
convicted of federal crimes, except  in cases of im-
peachment, or  reduce  a  person’s  jail  sentence  or
fine; (4) makes treaties with the advice and consent
of the  Senate; (5)  appoints  ambassadors, federal
court  judges, and  other  top  officials, with  Senate
consent; (6) delivers an annual State of the Union
message  to  Congress  and  sends  Congress  other
messages from time to time; (7) calls Congress into
special  session  when  necessary ; (8)  meets  w ith
heads of state, ambassadors, and other  foreign of-
ficials; (9) commissions all military officers of the
United States; and (10) ensures that the laws Con-
gress passes are “faithfully executed.”
The  Presidency  Then  and  Now Presiden-
tial  government was  a  novel  idea  in  1789. Much
would depend on the character of the person hold-
ing  the office. Everyone  knew, and  even
discussed  openly  at  the Constitutional
Convention, that  George  Washington
was  the  likely  choice. Washington  did
not  seek  the office. He wrote his  friend,
the Marquis de Lafayette:
“ All that may be necessary
to add, my dear Mar-
quis, in order to show
my decided predilec-
tion [preference], is
that (at my time of life
and under my circum-
stances) the [i]ncreas-
ing infirmities of nature
and the growing love of re-
tirement do not permit me to
entertain a wish beyond that of
living and dying an honest man
on my own farm. ”—George Washington 
When  pressed  into  serv ice, Wash-
ington was  very  careful  about  the  dis-
charge of his duties, knowing that every

act would set a precedent. Inundated with requests
for jobs in the executive branch, he refused to show
any  par tiality  to  friends  and  relatives. After  two
terms  he  retired  to  private  life, stating  that  two
terms were sufficient for anyone.
Early presidents would not recognize the office
today. President Washington had so little to do on
some days that he advertised in the newspaper the
times when  he would  entertain  visitors. He  held
tea parties for anyone “properly attired” on Friday
evenings. Washington had only a handful of advis-
ers  and  staff. By  1800, when  President  Adams
moved to Washington, D.C., the second president’s
papers were packed in only seven boxes.
In  contrast, modern  presidents’ schedules  are
timed minute by minute. Presidents preside over a
White House  staff numbering  in  the  hundreds, a
military  force  of millions, and  a  vast  federal  bu-
reaucracy made  up  of all  executive  branch  em-
ployees. The Chief Executive meets with  officials
on a tight schedule, often working into the night. A
fleet  of airplanes  and  helicopters  stands  ready  to
carry the president and close advisers to any part of
the nation or the world.

A Changing Office

Presidential Leadership George Washington set many
precedents as president. Washington, although a brilliant
leader, was cautious. During the Civil War, President Lincoln
boldly used measures to quiet opposition, even though such
measures violated constitutional guarantees of free speech,
press, and assembly. What outside forces shaped Wash-
ington and Lincoln’s view of the presidency?

CHAPTER 3: THE CONSTITUTION 71

068-075 CH03S2-860053  12/1/04  1:40 AM  Page 72

The Judicial Branch
If judged by the length of Article III, the ju-
dicial  branch  appears  to  be  the weakest  of
the  branches  of government. After  naming  the
Supreme Court, the Constitution allows Congress
to establish all “inferior” courts. The Framers were
not concerned about  the power of the  justices, al-
lowing them to hold office for life.
Jurisdiction  of  Federal  Courts The  judi-
ciary of the United States has two different systems
of cour ts. One  system  consists  of the  federal
courts, whose powers derive from the Constitution
and  federal  laws. The  other  includes  the  courts  of
each  of the  50  states, whose  powers  derive  from
state  constitutions  and  laws. Some have described
the  two-cour t  systems  existing  side  by  side  as  a
dual court system.

Every court has the authority to hear only cer-
tain kinds of cases. This authority is known as the
jurisdiction  of the  court. Two  factors  determine
the  jurisdiction  of federal  cour ts—the  subject
matter  of the  case  and  the  parties  involved  in  it.
Federal  courts  try  cases  that  involve United  States
laws, treaties with  foreign  nations, or  interpreta-
tions of the Constitution. Cases involving admiral-
ty  or maritime  law—the  law  of the  sea, including
ships, their  crews, and  disputes  over  actions  and
rights at sea—also come under federal court juris-
diction. Federal  cour ts  also  try  cases  involv ing
bankruptcy.
Federal  Courts  Then  and  Now When  the
federal government moved to Washington, D.C., in
1800, the capital architects forgot to design a build-
ing  for  the  Supreme Court! Two weeks before  the
start  of its  term, the Court was  assigned  a  small

Making a Difference Sam Dardick had polio as a
child, resulting in perma-
nent physical disability.
Making a Difference
Every day he faces obstacles that
go unnoticed by most people
Sam and Geeta Dardick
without disabilities. Climbing
stairs, boarding buses, and ma-
neuvering in small public rest-
rooms are a challenge for
someone in a wheelchair.
In the 1960s Sam married.
His wife, Geeta, who does not
have a disability, started to see
firsthand some of the challenges
her husband faced. At the time
there were no national laws 
requiring businesses to provide
access to people with disabil-
ities. “Sam’s wheelchair was
a problem for both of us.
We’d try to rent an apartment
and find that 100 percent of
them had stairs. We’d go to
the movies: stairs again.
We’d plan to take the bus . . .
more stairs,” she said.
When the Dardicks
moved to California in the

Access for
those with
disabilities

1970s, they found that the state
had wheelchair accessibility laws
but needed help to enforce them.
Geeta and Sam worked thou-
sands of hours to raise communi-
ty awareness and to police the
construction sites of new build-
ings to make sure people with
disabilities were taken into con-
sideration. “We marched for ac-
cess to public transportation in
San Francisco, testified for ac-
cessible apartments in Sacra-
mento, busted inaccessible city
council meetings in Nevada City,
and started an Independent Liv-
ing Center in Grass Valley,”
Geeta said.
The Dardicks helped to bring
about the passage of the Ameri-
cans with Disabilities Act (ADA) in
1990. This was the first national
civil rights bill for people with 
disabilities. The law requires all
public places to be wheelchair ac-
cessible. It also prohibits job dis-
crimination against persons with
physical or mental disabilities. 

72 CHAPTER 3: THE CONSTITUTION

068-075 CH03S2-860053  12/1/04  1:40 AM  Page 73

The Early Presidency

chamber on the main floor of the
Capitol. In  the  beginning , jus-
tices  of the  Supreme Court were
assigned  to “ride  circuit,” mean-
ing that when the Supreme Court
was  not  in  session, they  had  to
hear  appeals  in  faraway  district
cour ts. John  Jay, the  first  chief
justice, who  resigned  in  1795,
later  declined  President Adams’s
nomination  to  serve  again  be-
cause of the strain of such duty.
Congress  created  the  mod-
ern federal court system in 1891,
but  the  Supreme Court  did  not
have its own building until 1935.
Despite  this  humble  history, the
Supreme  Cour t  today  heads  a
powerful branch of government.
It  has  carved  out  power  in  a
number  of landmark  cases  be-
ginning with Marbury v. Madison
in 1803. In that case Chief Justice
John  Marshall  announced  that
the Judiciary Act of 1789 gave the
Court more power than the Con-
stitution  allowed. Thus, the  act
was unconstitutional. The power
to declare laws unconstitutional, known as judicial
review, elevated the Supreme Court to a status bal-
ancing the powers of the other branches.
When  it  rules  on  constitutional  issues, the
Supreme Court  cannot  be  overturned  except  by 
a  constitutional  amendment. But  Congress  can 
effectively  over turn  a  Supreme  Cour t  decision 
interpreting  a  federal  statute  by  enacting  a  new 
law.

Shared Power and Conflict
The  Constitution  created  three  separate
branches  of government. It  spelled  out
some specific areas in which those branches would
cooperate, such as  in passing  legislation, conduct-
ing war, and  spending money. Many of the work-
ing  relationships  among  the  three  branches,
however, are  not  specifically  mentioned  in  the
Constitution. These  relationships  developed  over
time  during  the  normal  ebb  and  flow  of govern-
ment operation and policy creation.

The Roles of the President Shown here in The Republican Court
by Daniel Huntington, the president held this reception in New York
City in 1789 to honor his wife, Martha. In his spare time, Washington
often entertained guests. Why have the president’s duties
increased over the past 200 years?

The President  as  Legislator The executive
and legislative branches must work together closely
in  order  for  legislation  to  become  effective policy.
Without cooperation among the branches the gov-
ernment can do little, if anything, to address the na-
tion’s problems or serve its needs.
In  practice, the  executive  branch  prov ides
plans  for much  of the  legislation  that  Congress
considers. The presidential  initiative  in  legislation
is mentioned in Article II, Section 3, of the Consti-
tution:
“He shall, from time to time, give the Con-
gress information of the state of the Union,
and recommend to their consideration
such measures as he shall judge necessary
and expedient . . . . ”—Article II, Section 3
The president proposes much of the legislative
agenda and spells out the details of programs that
are  enacted  into  law. In  order  for  programs  to  be

CHAPTER 3: THE CONSTITUTION 73

068-075 CH03S2-860053  12/1/04  1:40 AM  Page 74

Quiet, Please! The delegates to the
Constitutional Convention in Philadelphia
really needed to concentrate on writing 
the Constitution. The sound of carriages 
and carts passing back and forth on 
cobblestone streets outside the 
Pennsylvania State House 
bothered the delegates.
Therefore, they hired people 
to shovel dirt onto the street 
outside to muffle the noise.

effective, the  executive  branch  must  have  the
power  to  carry  out  legislative  enactments. This
often  involves  creation  of a  bureaucracy  to  carry
out the details of policy.
The President vs. Congress While cooper-
ation between the executive and legislative branches
is  necessary, several  sources  of conflict
between  these  two  branches have devel-
oped. The  expansion  of presidential
power has  changed  the  structure  of the
national  government  without  formal
changes in the Constitution. The growing
power of the executive has, at times, trou-
bled Congress. At other times, presidents
have  charged Congress with  attempts  to
encroach upon executive power.
Another  source  of conflict  between
the branches stems from the responsibil-
ity  of Congress  to monitor  the way  the
executive  branch  enforces  the  laws.
Sometimes  the  two  branches  quarrel
over the way the president interprets the
w ill  of Congress  in  bills  it  has  passed.
When  this  happens, the  federal  courts
may  be  called  upon  to  interpret  the  in-
tent of Congress on a case-by-case basis.
Occasionally, however, Congress has
been accused of yielding too much power
to  the Chief Executive. For  example, in

74 CHAPTER 3: THE CONSTITUTION

1935 the Supreme Court nullified the law creating
the National  Recovery Administration  (NRA). In
the majority opinion Chief Justice Hughes said:
“ Congress cannot delegate legislative 
power to the President to exercise an
unfettered discretion to make whatever
laws he thinks may be needed or 
advisable for the rehabilitation and 
expansion of trade or industry. ”
—Charles Evans Hughes, 1935
Finally, the development of political parties has
created a source of conflict. If the executive office is
controlled  by  one party  and  the  legislature  by  an-
other party, cooperation  is unlikely. Each party has
a different  agenda, different  constituents  to please,
and  even  a different philosophy of government. At
best, different parties in the executive and legislative
branches  develop  carefully  studied  compromise
policies. At worst, they develop  gridlock  in which
nothing productive can be accomplished.
Congress  vs.  the  Courts The Constitution
gave Congress power both to create the lower fed-
eral  cour ts  and  to  limit  the  jurisdiction  of the
Supreme  Cour t. Congress, however, has  been 

The President and Congress

Legislative Proposals President George W. Bush outlines
his legislative proposals to Congress. What is the purpose
of the president’s annual State of the Union Address?

068-075 CH03S2-860053  12/1/04  1:40 AM  Page 75

NRA quilt

A Time of Crisis

Separation of Powers
President Roosevelt’s New
Deal policies chal-
lenged many of the 
traditional views on the
separation of powers.
How can a time of 
crisis affect the pub-
lic’s opinion on the
role of the national
government?

reluctant to use this authority. When the Supreme
Court  in 1964  ruled  that both houses of state  leg-
islatures must  be  reapportioned  on  a  population
basis, the United  States House  of Representatives
passed  a  bill  to  strip  the  Supreme Court  and  all
federal  courts  of jurisdiction  over  state  legislative
redistricting. The Senate, however, killed the bill.
The  Supreme  Court  vs.  the  President
Some  Supreme Court  decisions  require  compli-
ance  by  the  president  in  order  that  the  decisions
may be carried out. Occasionally, a president who

disagrees with  the Court may  refuse  to enforce  its
decision. In the 1830s, the Court upheld the rights
of the Cherokee against the state of Georgia. It de-
nied the state of Georgia the power to pass laws af-
fecting Native Americans  liv ing  there. President
Andrew  Jackson, however, refused  to  prov ide 
military  force  to  carry  out  the  Cour t  order. In 
another instance, President Franklin Roosevelt in-
dicated he would not obey adverse decisions in two
separate  pending  cases. In  both  instances  the
Cour t  avoided  conflict  by  ruling  in  favor  of the
president.

both

President

Checking for Understanding
1. Main Idea Using a Venn 
diagram, analyze the dif-
ferent functions of the 
president and Congress in 
passing legislation and the functions they share.
2. Define expressed powers, enumerated powers,
elastic clause, federal bureaucracy.
3. Identify McCulloch v. Maryland.
4. Identify five powers of the president.
5. What two systems of courts make up the 
judiciary of the United States?
6. How can Supreme Court decisions be 
overturned?

S e c t i o n   2   A s s e s s m e n t
S e c t i o n   2   A s s e s s m e n t
Critical Thinking
7. Making Comparisons What information would
you need to determine which branch of the feder-
al government has the greatest power? Formu-
late questions to obtain needed information.

Congress

Separation of Powers One of the cases heard
by the Supreme Court involved the ruling that
televising court proceedings does not neces-
sarily deny defendants the right to a fair trial.
Conduct an opinion poll to find out whether
people favor or oppose televised trials. Chart
the responses and summarize the poll results.

CHAPTER 3: THE CONSTITUTION 75

076-081 CH03S3-860053  12/1/04  1:41 AM  Page 76

Key Terms
ratify, petition, balanced budget, impeach, treaty,
executive agreement, judicial restraint, judicial 
activism
Find Out
■ How does  the amendment process  illustrate
federalism? 
■ What are  the primary ways  that  informal
changes are made  in  the Constitution?
Understanding Concepts
Political Processes Why did the Framers make
the Constitution difficult to amend? 

S e c t i o n   3
S e c t i o n   3
Amending the Constitution
The  nation  that  the  Founders  wanted  to
Reader’s Guide
perfect  in 1787  consisted of fewer  than 4
million  people  liv ing  in  13  agricultural
states  along  the Atlantic  coast  of North
America. More than two centuries later, that same
Constitution  provides  the  foundation  for  govern-
ing  an  industrial  and  highly  technological  nation
of more than 285 million people in 50 states spread
across  the  continent  and  beyond. The  priceless
heritage of the Constitution has been  its ability  to
adapt to new conditions while preserving the basic
form  of American  government. The  words  of
Chief Justice  John Marshall  in  1819  remain  true
today:
“We must never forget that it is . . . a 
Constitution intended to endure for ages to
come, and, consequently, to be adapted to
the various crises of human affairs. ”
—John Marshall, 1819
The Amendment Process
The Founders  created  a Constitution  that
could  be  adapted  to  a  future  they  could
not  foresee. One way  they  provided  for  change
was  to  describe  how  Congress  and  the  states
could  amend  the Constitution. As  outlined  in
Article V, amendments may  deal with  any  topic
except that no state can lose equal representation
in the Senate without the state’s consent.
Amendments  may  be  proposed  and  rati-
fied, or  approved, in  two  ways. Regardless  of
the  proposal  and  ratification  methods  used,
however, the  amendment  process  illustrates 
the  federal  system  of American  government.
Amendments  are  proposed  at  a  national  level,
but they are ratified on a state-by-state basis.
Proposing Amendments One method of
proposing  an  amendment  is  by  a  two-thirds
vote of each house of Congress. This is the only
method that has been used to date. Dozens of

Mad ison’s  Amendmen t
WASH INGTON ,  D .C . ,  MAY 1 9 9 2
T h e  
Tw e n t y - s e v e n t h
t h e
t o  
Am e n dm e n t  
C o n s t i t u t i o n   w a s   r a t i f i e d
by  M i ch i g a n , t h e   n e c e s s a r y
t h i r t y - e i g h t h   s t a t e   t o d a y,
m o r e   t h a n   2 0 2   y e a r s   a f t e r  
i t  w a s  p ro p o s e d . T h e  m e a s -
u r e   t h a t   p r e ven t s   Con g r e s s
f r om   v o t i n g   i t s e l f a   p a y
r a i s e   s t u n n e d   g o v e r nm e n t
J am e s   M a d i s o n
J am e s   M a d i s o n
l e a d e r s .
o f f e r e d t h e   am e n dm e n t  
in   1789 , bu t   i t  w a s  n e ve r   adop ted . Ten   ye a r s   ago, G re -
go r y  Wa t son , th en   a   20 - ye a r-o ld   s tud en t   a t   th e   Un i -
ve r s i t y  o f Tex a s , d i s cove red   th e   fo rgo t ten  am endm en t
wh i l e   do ing   re s e a rch   fo r   a   s choo l   p ap e r. Now   an   a id e
to   a   Tex a s   s t a te   l e g i s l a to r, Wa t son   m ad e   th e   am end -
m en t ’s   p a s s a g e   h i s   c r u s ad e . In   1 9 9 1   th e   S en a te ’s   un -
popu l a r   p ay   h ike   r a l l i ed   suppo r t   fo r   h i s   c au s e .

76 CHAPTER 3: THE CONSTITUTION

076-081 CH03S3-860053  12/1/04  1:41 AM  Page 77

resolutions asking  for  constitutional amendments
are  introduced  in  Congress  each  year. In  recent
years, suggestions have been made to put limits on
income taxes, to limit the tenure of Supreme Court
justices  to  12  years, and  to  give  states  complete
control  of oil  deposits within  their  borders. None
have won the necessary two-thirds vote.
The other method for proposing amendments
is  by  a  national  convention  called  by Congress  at
the  request  of two-thirds  of the  states. This
method has never been used, but in recent history
it has almost occurred  twice. In 1963  states began
to  petition, or  appeal  to, Congress  for  a  conven-
tion  to  propose  an  amendment  to  over turn
Supreme Court  decisions  affecting  the  election  of
state lawmakers. By 1967, 33 state legislatures, only
1  short  of the  required  two-thirds, had  voted  for
such a convention. The campaign  failed, however,
when no other states voted for the convention.
Between  1975  and  1991, 32  state  legislatures
petitioned Congress  for  a  convention  to  propose
an amendment requiring a balanced budget—one

in which  the  federal government’s spending never
exceeds  its  income. By  2000  federal  revenues 
exceeded expenses and most Americans lost inter-
est in a balanced budget amendment.
The convention method of proposing amend-
ments  is  controversial, because  such  a  convention
is  not  required  to  limit  itself to  a  specific  amend-
ment. President  Jimmy Carter  in  the  1970s  cau-
tioned  that  a  convention  for  a  federal  budget
amendment  might  be  “completely  uncontrol-
lable.” Legal  scholars warned  that  such  a  conven-
tion could propose amendments on any subject.

Ratifying  Amendments When  an  amend-
ment  is  proposed, Congress  chooses  one  of two
methods for states to approve it. One way is for leg-
islatures  in  three-fourths of the states  to ratify  the
amendment. The  other  is  for  each  state  to  call  a
special  ratifying  convention. The  amendment  be-
comes part of the Constitution when three-fourths
of these conventions approve it.

Process for Amending the Constitution
Process for Amending the Constitution

STEP 1: 
Amendment Proposed by:

STEP 2: 
Amendment Ratified by:

A two-thirds vote of both 
houses of Congress

Three-four ths of the 50 
state legislatures

OR

OR

A constitutional 
convention called by 
Congress on petition of 
two-thirds of the 50 states

Three-four ths of special
constitutional conventions 
called by the 50 states

New 
Amendment

Key

Used for all amendments 
except the Twenty-first
Used only for the
Twenty-first Amendment 
(repeal of Prohibition)
Never used

Critical Thinking
                              Amending the Constitution requires two steps: proposal and ratification. Why is 
the constitutional convention method of amending the Constitution controversial?

CHAPTER 3: THE CONSTITUTION 77

076-081 CH03S3-860053  12/1/04  1:41 AM  Page 78

Political Processes Congress approved the ERA in 1972, but it ran into opposition when it
was sent to the states for ratification. Do you think the Framers of the Constitution 
made it too difficult to amend the Constitution? 
Explain.

If a state rejects an amendment in the state leg-
islature method, lawmakers may later reverse their
decision and ratify the amendment. Suppose, how-
ever, a  state  legislature  approves  an  amendment
and then revokes the ratification. Is this legal? This
question  arose  over  the  proposed  Equal  Rights
Amendment (ERA) that would prohibit discrimi-
nation  on  the  basis  of gender. When  5  of the  35
state  legislatures  that  approved  the  ERA  later  re-
voked  their  ratification, questions  arose. Many
constitutional  scholars  contended  that  the  states’
revocations  were  unconstitutional. The  cour ts,
however, have never resolved the issue.
The  other  ratification method—by  state  rati-
fying conventions—has been used only once. Con-
ventions  ratified  the  Twenty-first  Amendment,
which repealed the Eighteenth Amendment (1919)
that  banned  the  sale  of alcoholic  beverages. Con-
gress  let  each  state  legislature  determine  how  the
ratifying conventions would be organized and  the
delegates  elected. Delegates  in  each  state  ran  for
election statewide either on a pledge to support the
amendment  or  on  a  pledge  to  reject  it. Then, at

78 CHAPTER 3: THE CONSTITUTION

each  state  ratifying  convention, the  elected  dele-
gates voted as they had pledged to do in their elec-
tion  campaigns. In  effect, this  method  gave  the
people a direct voice in the amending process.
Congress Sets the Rules In addition to de-
ciding  which  ratification  method  w ill  be  used,
Congress  decides  how much  time  the  states will
have  to  ratify  an  amendment. In modern  times,
Congress has set the limit at seven years.
Congress  can  put  the  time  limit  either  in  the
text  of the  amendment  or  in  legislation  that  ac-
companies  the  amendment. Placing  a  time  limit
can alter the fate of an amendment.

Informal Changes 
Although  formal  amendments  have  played
an  impor tant  role  in making  it  a “liv ing”
document, the Constitution has kept pace with the
times  and has grown  as  an  instrument of govern-
ment  through  informal  change  as  well. This
process does not involve changes in the wording of

076-081 CH03S3-860053  12/1/04  1:41 AM  Page 79

the Constitution  itself. Rather, informal  changes
occur as government leaders and citizens fill in the
details  of government  on  a  day-to-day, year-to-
year basis to suit the needs of the times.
Changes Through Law Congress has passed
laws  that  have  enlarged  or  clarified many  of the
Constitution’s  provisions. The  Founders  expected
Congress  to  do  this, and  they  gave  it  authority  to
spell out many details of the national government.
Article I, for example, gives Congress the power
to “lay and collect  taxes.” But what does  this provi-
sion mean? Congress has applied the taxing author-
ity of the Constitution and expanded its meaning by
passing complex tax laws that fill many volumes.
The  same  is  true  of the  executive  branch  that
Article II of the Constitution established. Congress
has greatly expanded  the executive branch by cre-
ating  the  cabinet  departments, agencies, boards,
and commissions.
In  Ar ticle  III, the  Founders  created  “one
Supreme Court” and other courts “as the Congress
may . . . establish.” Congress completed the judicial
branch by passing the Judiciary Act of 1789.
Over the years, Congress has changed the judi-
cial branch many times in response to new condi-
tions. As  the nation  expanded  and  the number  of

court cases  increased, Congress created additional
federal  cour ts, established  new  rules  of federal
court  procedure, and  provided  for  court workers
such as bailiffs and clerks.
Changes  Through  Practices Congress  has
also shaped the Constitution by the way it has used
its other powers. Under the Constitution, the House
may  impeach, or  accuse, federal  officials—includ-
ing the president—while it is up to the Senate to de-
termine  the  accused  person’s  guilt  or  innocence.
Article II states that:
“ The President, Vice-President, and all civil
Officers of the United States shall be re-
moved from Office on Impeachment for,
and Conviction of, Treason, Bribery, or
other high Crimes and Misdemeanors. ”
—Article II, Section 4
The  meanings  of treason and  br ibery are 
clear, but  what  about  “high  crimes  and  misde-
meanors”? This  is up  to Congress  to decide. Con-
gress  has  investigated  more  than  60  people  on
impeachment  charges,
including  three  presi-
dents—Andrew  Johnson, Richard Nixon, and Bill
Clinton.

Proposing an
Amendment

articipating
articipating
I N   G O V E R N M E N T
I N   G O V E R N M E N T
More than 10,000 proposals
for amendments to the
Constitution have been 
introduced in Congress since 1789.
Anyone can initiate an
amendment simply by 
writing a proposal for
amending the Constitution
to a member of Congress.
Activity
Select an issue you 
believe the Constitution

The Constitution

needs to address and propose an
amendment. Use existing amend-
ments as guides for form and lan-
guage to write your own
amendment. Follow these guide-
lines when writing your proposal:
• Explain what your proposed
amendment will do.
• Explain why you believe it is 
needed and how the nation will
benefit if it is ratified.
• Indicate what opposition you 
expect there to be to your 
amendment and why.
• Suggest arguments that could 
be used to reply to criticism 
of your amendment.
Submit your proposed amend-
ment in a letter to a member of
Congress.

CHAPTER 3: THE CONSTITUTION 79

076-081 CH03S3-860053  12/1/04  1:42 AM  Page 80

Veto Power

Presidential Influence Clinton warns Congress that if they do
not “send me legislation that guarantees every American private
health insurance . . . you will force me to take this pen [and]
veto the legislation.” How does the influence modern presi-
dents have on legislation differ from what the Founders 
intended?

Informal Presidential Changes
Presidential  actions  have  also  added  to  the
Constitution. Many  of these  additions  af-
fect the workings of the modern presidency.

Presidential  Succession In  1841 William
Henry Harrison became the first president to die in
office. As provided  in  the Constitution, Vice Presi-
dent  John Tyler  assumed  the powers of president.
But did Tyler actually become president, or would he
merely act as president until the next election?
Tyler took the presidential oath of office. Many
officials opposed Tyler’s interpretation of the Con-
stitution, but  no  one  successfully  challenged  him.
Not  until  1967, when  the  Twenty-fifth  Amend-
ment  clarified  presidential  succession, was  Tyler’s
precedent formally endorsed in the Constitution.

80 CHAPTER 3: THE CONSTITUTION

Foreign  Affairs Modern presi-
dents usually conduct foreign affairs
by  executive  agreement, instead  of
using  the  treaty process  specified  in
the Constitution. While  a  treaty is
an  agreement  between nations, an
executive agreement is made direct-
ly  between  the  president  and  the
head  of state  of another  country; it
does not require Senate approval.

Domestic  Affairs The  Found-
ers  thought  the  executive  branch
would  be  concerned  mostly  w ith
carrying out laws initiated by Con-
gress. Yet in this century, presidents
have  been  aggressive  in  requesting
legislation from Congress.
These  practices  have  become
important  precedents  for  building
the  power  of the  president. Today
the president plays a far greater role
in American government and poli-
tics than most of the Founders ever
imagined.

Court Decisions 
As  federal  courts  settle  cases
invo lv in g   con s t i tu t ion a l
questions, they interpret the mean-
ing  of the Constitution’s  sometimes  vague words
and  phrases. The  Supreme  Cour t, the  nation’s
highest court, plays a key role in this process.

Judicial  Review The most  important  device
the Court uses  to  interpret  the Constitution  is  ju-
dicial review. Although the principle of judicial re-
v iew  is  well  established, people  continue  to
disagree over how the Court should use this power.
Some  advocate  judicial  restraint; others  argue  for
judicial activism.
The philosophy of judicial restraint holds that
the Court should avoid taking the initiative on so-
cial  and  political  questions. The  Cour t  should 
uphold acts of Congress unless  the acts clearly vi-
olate  a  specific  provision  of the Constitution. In
other words, advocates  of judicial  restraint want
the Court to leave the policy making to others.

076-081 CH03S3-860053  12/1/04  1:42 AM  Page 81

The  philosophy  of judicial  activ ism, on  the
other hand, holds that the Court should play a role
in  shaping  national  policies. The  Cour t  should
apply the Constitution to social and political ques-
tions. The  Supreme  Cour t  under  Chief Justice
Earl Warren—from 1953 to 1969—accepted cases
involving many  controversial  issues, particularly
civil rights and the rights of the accused.
Because the Warren Court is considered an ac-
tivist Court, people today associate judicial activism
with  civil  rights  or  social  issues. History  suggests,
however, that the justices’ activism may justify their
individual choices in any area of policy. Thus, judi-
cial activism may mark either a conservative or lib-
eral  court. For  example, in  the  1930s  conservative
justices  frequently  took  activist  positions  against
government regulation of the economy.
Since the 1940s, however, most activist policies
have been in support of civil liberties. Political lib-
erals  have  tended  to  support  activism, while  con-
servatives have argued for judicial restraint.
Changing Court Rulings Social and political
conditions of the times often affect Court interpre-
tations  of the Constitution. The  Supreme Court
has  sometimes  ruled  that  the Constitution means
one  thing  and  then, years  later, reversed  itself. In
1896, for  example, the Court  ruled  that  separate
public facilities for African Americans were consti-
tutional as long as those facilities were equal. More
than  a  half century  later, in  1954, the  Court 

reversed  its  position  when  it  decided  to  outlaw
racial segregation in public schools.
Changes Through Custom 
and Usage
The Constitution  has  been  informally  en-
larged through customs that have developed
over time. Political parties are a good example. The
Constitution  does  not mention  political  parties,
but they began soon after the government was or-
ganized and have been an important part of Amer-
ican  government  since  then. Today  parties  help
organize government and conduct elections.
The  amendments  added  to  the Constitution
and  the  changes  achieved  through  precedent  and
practice  have  created  a  government  that  can 
respond  to  the conditions and needs of the  times.
Thus, this  short, simple  document  has  continued
for  more  than  two  centuries  to  serve  as  the
supreme law of the land.

GOVERNMENT

Student Web Activity Visit the United States
Government: Democracy  in Action Web site at
gov.glencoe.com and click on Chapter 3–Student
Web Activities for an activity about amending the
Constitution.

S e c t i o n   3   A s s e s s m e n t
S e c t i o n   3   A s s e s s m e n t

Checking for Understanding
1. Main Idea Using a graphic organizer like the one
below, describe at least one way Congress and the
Supreme Court each have changed the Constitution.
Changes  in the Constitution   
By Congress
By Supreme Court
2. Define ratify, petition, balanced budget, 
impeach, treaty, executive agreement, judicial 
restraint, judicial activism.
3. Identify Equal Rights Amendment (ERA), Chief
Justice Earl Warren.
4. Identify the two methods of ratifying amendments.

Critical Thinking
5. Analyzing Information How have the four 
informal methods of amending the Constitution
affected the role of the executive branch in the
federal government?

Political Processes Do you think the Founders
were correct in allowing the Constitution to 
be amended? Write a letter to the editor of a
local newspaper explaining your position on
this issue.

CHAPTER 3: THE CONSTITUTION 81

082-083_TNHS Notebk Const  12/1/04  1:43 AM  Page 82

N O T E B O O K

A
P
 
P
H
O
T
0

CONSIDERING THE CONSTITUTION
THE CONSTITUTION ALLOWS CONGRESS TO IMPEACH THE PRESIDENT.
BARBARA JORDAN, the first African American woman elected to
the Texas State Senate, was serving on the
House Judiciary Committee in 1974. This
committee was considering the
impeachment of Richard Nixon for
“high crimes and misdemeanors.”
Jordan examined how our
Constitution has changed and
expanded over the years. Here is 
part of her speech on this issue:

M I L E S T O N E S
ACCEPTED, May 7, 1992. THE
TWENTY-SEVENTH AMENDMENT 
to the Constitution was ratified
203 years after it was first
proposed. The amendment
states that raises for members
of Congress will take effect
only after the subsequent
congressional election. 

“Mr. Chairman .   .   .   Earlier today we
heard the beginning of the Preamble to
the Constitution of the United States,  ‘We,
the people.’ It is a very eloquent beginning. But
when the document was completed on the 17th of
September, 1787, I was not included in that  ‘We, the people.’ I felt
somehow for many years that George Washington and Alexander
Hamilton just left me out by mistake. But through the process of
amendment, interpretation, and court decision, I have finally been
included in  ‘We, the people.’”
SPECIAL POWERS? 
Article 1, Section 8 of the Constitution states that “Congress shall
have the power to declare war.” But it is the president, claiming
special powers from the Constitution, who often declares war.
Which of the wars from the past 100 years listed below were
declared by Congress? 
1
World War II
2
Korean War
3
Vietnam War
4
The war  in Grenada
(Answer: World War II is the only war on the list that was declared by Congress.)

Persian Gulf War
The war  in Afghanistan
The war  in  Iraq

5
6
7

82

A
F
P
 
P
H
O
T
O
S
/
N
E
W
S
C
O
M

RESTORED, 2002. TWO LARGE
MURALS in the National Archives
Building in Washington, D.C.
This building, the home of the
Constitution, is where artist
Barry Frank painted the murals
in 1936. They depict fictional
scenes of the presentation 
of the Constitution and the
Declaration of Independence.
The murals were painstakingly
restored over a two-year period.   

T
H
E
 
G
R
A
N
G
E
R
 
C
O
L
L
E
C
T
I
O
N

082-083_TNHS Notebk Const  12/1/04  1:43 AM  Page 83

U . S .   C O N S T I T U T I O N

V E R B A T I M
W H A T   P E O P L E   S A I D
“The people made the Constitution, and the people can unmake it.
It is the creature of their will, and lives only by their will.”
U.S. Supreme Court Chief Justice JOHN MARSHALL, 1821
“I would rather have a King, a House of Lords and Commons than
the new government.” 
The patriot PATRICK HENRY, in support of his stand against the
establishment of the Constitution in 1788
“Setting up White House operatives who secretly decide to fight
dirty little wars is a direct assumption of war powers expressly
forbidden by the Constitution.”
Journalist BILL MOYERS, writing about the Iran-Contra affair, when the
Reagan administration attempted to bypass Congress in the name of
national security 
“The Constitution I interpret is not living, but dead….
Our first responsibility is to not make sense of the
law—our first responsibility is to follow the text
of the law.”
ANTONIN SCALIA, nominated by President Reagan
to be an associate justice of the Supreme Court
in 1986
“The happy union of these states is a
wonder; their constitution a miracle;
their example the hope of liberty
throughout the world.”
JAMES MADISON, sometimes
called the “Father of the  
Constitution,” 1829

James Madison

B
E
T
T
M
A
N
N
/
C
O
R
B
I
S

N U M B E R S
N U M B E R S  
5
28” by 23  ”
8
The measurements of each of
the four sheets of the U.S.
Constitution  

M
A
T
T
H
E
W
 
K
L
E
I
N
/
C
O
R
B
I
S

$30 Amount paid to Jacob
Shallus, who transcribed the
words of the Constitution  in
“fancy handwriting”  in
preparation for  its signing

9 The number of states that
needed to ratify the Constitution
in order for  it to go  into effect.
This happened  in June 1788,
when New Hampshire became
the 9th state to ratify.

12 Number of amendments
originally proposed to the
Constitution. Ten of these were
accepted and are known as the
Bill of Rights. 

39 Number
of signers of
the Constitution

CORBIS
1 Number of amendments that
have been repealed. The
Eighteenth Amendment, which
dealt with Prohibition, was
repealed  in 1933.

REMAIN SILENT
The Supreme Court’s ruling in
Miranda v. Arizona (1966) said that
people who are arrested must be
informed of their constitutional rights
before being questioned by the police.
This requirement is known as “Miranda rights.” 
Here’s one script police officers use to inform people of their Miranda rights:
1. You have the right to remain silent.
2. Anything you say can and will be used against you  in a court of  law.
3. You have the right to have an attorney present now and during any future questioning.
4. If you cannot afford an attorney, one will be appointed to you free of charge  if you wish.

Z
U
M
A
/
N
E
W
S
C
O
M

83

084-093 CH03S4-860053  12/1/04  1:44 AM  Page 84

S e c t i o n   4
S e c t i o n   4
The Amendments
Because  critics  attacked  the proposed Con-
Reader’s Guide
stitution  for  not  protecting  the  rights  of
the people, the Founders promised  to add
a  list  of such  rights. The  first  Congress
quickly proposed 12 amendments and sent them to
the states  for ratification. In 1791  the states ratified
10 of the amendments, which became known as the
Bill of Rights.

Key Terms
prior restraint, probable cause, search warrant, 
arrest warrant, due process of law, eminent do-
main, lame duck, poll tax
Find Out
■ Why  is  it  important  in a democratic society  that
the government  follow due process of  law when
trying suspected criminals?
■ How do  the amendments  to  the Constitution
show  the development of democracy  in  the
United States?
Understanding Concepts
Growth of Democracy How do the amendments
reflect changes in society’s perception of rights
under the Constitution?

Wha t  B i l l  o f R igh ts?
WASH INGTON ,  D .C . ,  D ECEMBER 1 9 9 1
O n l y   o n e  
t h r e e
i n  
k n ow s
Am e r i c a n s  
w h a t   t h e   B i l l   o f R i g h t s   i s ,
a c c o r d i n g   t o   a   p o l l   c om -
m i s s i o n e d   b y   t h e   Am e r i -
c a n   B a r   A s s o c i a t i o n . T h e
s u r v e y   o f f e r e d   a   s e r i e s   o f
m u l t i p l e   c h o i c e   q u e s t i o n s
to  5 0 7  p a r t i c i p a n t s . T h i r t y -
t h r e e   p e r c e n t   c o r r e c t l y
P o l l i n g   Am e r i c a n s
i d en t i f i e d   t h e  B i l l  o f R i g h t s
a s   t h e   f i r s t   1 0   am en dm en t s
t o   t h e   C o n s t i t u t i o n ; b u t   2 8   p e r c e n t   s a i d   i t   w a s   t h e
C o n s t i t u t i o n ’s   P r e am b l e . A n o t h e r   7   p e r c e n t   c o n -
f u s e d   i t   w i t h   t h e   D e c l a r a t i on   o f In d e p en d en c e , an d
1 0   p e r c e n t   s im p l y   d i d n’ t   k n ow. F ew e r   t h a n   1   i n   1 0
k n ew  w hy   t h e   B i l l   o f R i g h t s  w a s   a d o p t e d .

84

The Bill of Rights
The Bill of Rights limits the powers of gov-
ernment. When  the  Constitution  was
adopted, some  state  constitutions  had  bills  of
rights. Thus it seemed necessary and reasonable to
add similar limits to the new national government.
Although the Bill of Rights originally applied only
to  the  national  government, almost  all  its  provi-
sions have been applied to the states through a se-
ries of Supreme Court decisions.
The First Amendment One of the most  im-
portant amendments in the Bill of Rights, the First
Amendment states:
“ Congress shall make no law respecting an
establishment of religion, or prohibiting
the free exercise thereof; or abridging the
freedom of speech, or of the press; or the
right of the people peaceably to assemble,
and to petition the Government for a re-
dress of grievances. ”—First Amendment, 1791
The  First Amendment protects  the  right  of
Americans  to worship  as  they please, or  to have
no  religion  if they  prefer. These  principles  are
known as  freedom of religion and  separation of
church  and  state. In  addition, the  First Amend-
ment protects  freedom  of speech  and  freedom 
of the  press. The  government  cannot  prevent 
individuals  from  freely  expressing  their  opin-
ions. Citizens  thus  have  the  right  to  criticize 

084-093 CH03S4-860053  12/1/04  1:44 AM  Page 85

government  officials  and  decisions, and  they  are 
allowed to spread unpopular ideas.
The First Amendment protects not only  indi-
vidual speech, but also extends to the circulation of
ideas in newspapers, books, magazines, radio, tele-
v ision, and, to  some  extent, mov ies. Unlike  the
press in some other countries, the American press
is  not  subject  to  prior  restraint—that  is, govern-
ment  censorship  of information  before  it  is  pub-
lished or broadcast.
Freedom  Within  Limits The  freedoms  of
speech  and  the  press  are  not  unlimited, however.
For example, laws prohibit slander and libel. Slan-
der is  false  speech  intended  to  damage  a  person’s
reputation. Libel is  similar  to  slander, except  that 
it  applies  to written  or  published  statements. En-
dangering  the nation’s  safety  by  giving  away mili-
tary  secrets  or  calling  for  the  v iolent  over throw 
of the  government  also  are  not  protected. Courts
have  also  held  that  speech  should  be  responsible.
For example, no one has the right to cry “Fire!” in
a crowded theater just to see what happens.
The  First Amendment  also  protects  the  right
to  assemble  in  groups  and  hold  demonstrations.
People may  pass  out  pamphlets, hold meetings,
and do other  things  that peaceably  advertise  their
beliefs. Courts  have  ruled, however, that  the  gov-
ernment  can  require  a  group  to  obtain  a  permit
before holding meetings or demonstrations.
Finally, the First Amendment protects the right
to  criticize  government  officials  and  their  actions.
The rights to sign petitions in support of an idea, to
present those petitions to government officials, and
to send letters to those officials are all protected.
The  Second  Amendment This  amendment
ensures citizens and the nation the right to securi-
ty. It states:
“ A well-regulated Militia being necessary to
the security of a free State, the right of the
people to keep and bear Arms shall not be
infringed. ”—Second Amendment, 1791
Or ig inally, the  Second Amendment was  in-
tended  to  prevent  the  national  government  from
repeating  actions  that  the  British  had  taken. Be-
fore  the  Revolution, the  Br itish  tr ied  to  take

weapons  away  from  colonial  militia, or  armed
forces of citizens.
This amendment seems to support the right for
citizens  to  own  firearms, but  it  does  not  prevent
Congress  from  regulating  the  interstate  sale  of
weapons, nor has  the  Supreme Court  applied  the
Second Amendment  to  the  states. Many  state  con-
stitutions guarantee the right to keep and bear arms.
The  Third  Amendment This  amendment
prohibits  the  government  from  forcing  people  to
provide shelter for soldiers in their homes, anoth-
er British practice before  the Revolution. In  times
of war, however, Congress may  require  a  home-
owner to house soldiers but only under conditions
clearly spelled out by law.
The  Fourth  Amendment The  Four th
Amendment reflects the early Americans’ desire to
protect their privacy. Britain had used writs of as-
sistance—general  search  warrants—to  seek  out
smuggled  goods. To  guard  against  such  searches
and  seizures, the Fourth Amendment protects  the
right  to  privacy. It  requires  authorities  to  have  a
specific reason to search a premises or to seize evi-
dence  or  people. Police  cannot  simply  conduct  a
general search or seizure hoping to find damaging
evidence, or arrest someone on the chance that he
or she might have committed a crime.
To be lawful, a search or an arrest must be based
on probable cause, meaning that police must have a
reasonable basis to believe the person or premises is
linked  to  a  crime. A  search or  an  arrest  also usually
requires  a  search  warrant or  an  arrest  warrant.
These are orders signed by a judge describing a spe-
cific place  to be searched  for specific  items or nam-
ing the individual to be arrested for a specific crime.
The  Fifth  Amendment This  amendment
contains four important protections for people ac-
cused of crimes. First, no one can be tried for a se-
rious crime unless a grand jury has decided there is
enough evidence to justify a trial.
Second, a  person who  is  found  innocent  of a
crime may not be tried again for the same offense.
This clause prevents continued harassment of indi-
viduals  in  order  to  convict  them  of a  crime  for
which they have already been found innocent.
Third, no one may be  forced  to  testify against
himself or herself. As a result, people questioned by

CHAPTER 3: THE CONSTITUTION   85

084-093 CH03S4-860053  12/1/04  1:44 AM  Page 86

The Bill of Rights
The Bill of Rights

1 Guarantees freedom of religion, speech, 
assembly, and press, and the right of 
people to petition the government

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

Protects the right of states to maintain a 
militia and of citizens to bear arms

Restricts quartering of troops in private homes

Protects against “unreasonable searches 
and seizures”

Assures the right not to be deprived of “life, 
liberty, or property, without due process of 
law,” including protections against double 
jeopardy, self-incrimination, and government 
seizure of property without just compensation

Guarantees the right to a speedy and public 
trial by an impartial jury

Assures the right to a jury trial in cases 
involving the common law (the law 
established by previous court decisions)

Protects against excessive bail and cruel and 
unusual punishment

Provides that people’s rights are not restricted 
to those specified in Amendments 1–8

10

Restates the Constitution’s principle of 
federalism by providing that powers not 
granted to the national government nor 
prohibited to the states are reserved to the 
states and to the people

Critical Thinking
 
 
   The Bill of Rights was not 
part of the original Constitution. For what 
purpose were the first 10 amendments 
added to the Constitution?

the  police, on  trial, or  testifying  before  a  congres-
sional  hearing may  refuse  to   answer  questions  if
their answers would connect them with a criminal
act. The  government  must  establish  a  person’s  
guilt  by  finding  independent  evidence  of the  per-
son’s involvement with the crime. Individuals can-
not be required to convict themselves.
Finally, the  Fifth Amendment  states  that  gov-
ernment may not deprive any person of life, liber-
ty, or  property without  due  process  of law. This
means  that  the  government must  follow   proper

86 CHAPTER 3: THE CONSTITUTION

constitutional  procedures  in  trials  and  in  other 
actions it takes against individuals.
The  Fifth  Amendment  also  defines  govern-
ment’s  right  of eminent  domain—the  power  of
government  to   take  private  proper ty   for  public 
use  such  as  to  build  a  highway, a  dam, or  a  park.
The government must pay a fair price for the prop-
erty  taken  and must  use  it  in  a way  that  benefits 
the public.
The  Sixth  Amendment This  amendment
protects the rights of individuals charged with fed-
eral  crimes  to  defend  themselves  in  a  court  trial.
The  Supreme Court, however, has  ruled  that  these
rights  also  apply  to  people  charged  with  crimes
subject to state courts. The Sixth Amendment gives
an accused person several important rights.
A basic protection is the right to a speedy, pub-
lic  trial by an  impartial  jury. Thus, the authorities
cannot purposely hold a person for an unnecessar-
ily  long  time  awaiting  trial. This  protection  pre-
vents  government  from  silencing  its  critics  by
holding them for years without trials, as often hap-
pens  under  dictatorships. The  requirement  that
trials be conducted in public assures that justice is
carried out in full view of the people.
Although the amendment provides for trial by
jury, an  accused  person may  ask  to   be  tried  by  a
judge alone. The accused also may ask  to have his
or  her  trial  moved  to   another  community. A
change  of venue, or  new  trial  location, is  some-
times  requested when  unfavorable  publicity  indi-
cates  that  the  defendant  cannot  receive  an
impartial trial in the original location.
The  Sixth Amendment  gives  accused  persons
the right to know the charges against them, so that
they may  prepare  a  defense. Accused  persons  also
have  the  right  to  hear  and  question  all witnesses
against them and the right to compel witnesses to
appear at the trial and testify in their behalf. These
protections allow defendants to respond to the tes-
timony of witnesses. In  addition, accused persons
have the right to be defended by a lawyer.
The  Seventh  Amendment The  Seventh
Amendment provides for the right to a jury trial in
federal courts  to settle all disputes about property
worth more than $20. When both parties in a con-
flict agree, however, a judge rather than a jury may
hear evidence and settle the case.

084-093 CH03S4-860053  12/1/04  1:44 AM  Page 87

The  Eighth  Amendment This  amendment
prohibits  excessive  bail—money  or  proper ty 
that  the  accused  deposits w ith  the  court  to  gain 
release  from  jail until  the  trial. The  judge  sets bail
in an amount that ensures the accused will appear
for trial. When the trial ends, bail is returned. If the
accused does not appear, bail is forfeited.
The  Eighth Amendment  also  prevents  judges
from  ordering  someone  conv icted  of a  crime  to
pay an excessive fine. Fines for serious crimes may
be higher than those for less serious ones. If some-
one is too poor, he or she cannot be imprisoned for
longer  than  the maximum  sentence  to “work off ”
the fine.
Finally, the  Eighth  Amendment  bans “cruel
and  unusual  punishment” for  crimes. These  are
punishments  that  are  out  of propor tion  to  the
crime committed. For example, 20 years in prison
for stealing a candy bar would be cruel and unusu-
al  punishment. The  Eighth Amendment  also  has
been used  to  limit  the use  of the  death  penalty  in
some circumstances.
The  Ninth  Amendment The Ninth Amend-
ment  states  that all other  rights not  spelled out  in
the Constitution are “retained by the people.” This
amendment  prevents  government  from  claiming
that the only rights people have are those  listed  in
the  Bill  of Rights. The  amendment  protects  all
basic or natural rights not specifically noted in the
Constitution.
The  Tenth  Amendment Unlike  the  other
amendments, the  Tenth Amendment  did  not  add
any thing  to  the  ratified  constitution. The  final
amendment was intended to reaffirm the relation-
ship between  the national  and  state  governments.
It  confirms  that  the  people  and  states  have  rights
that the national government may not assume.

Other Amendments
The  27  amendments  fall  into  3  major
groups. The  first group, which  includes  the
Bill of Rights, was added between 1791 and 1804 to
put finishing touches on the original Constitution.
The  Eleventh  and  Twelfth Amendments  also  be-
long to this group.
Article  III, Section 1, of the Constitution gave
the  federal  cour ts  jurisdiction  in  cases  arising 

between states, between citizens of different states,
or between a state and citizens of another state. In
1795  the  Eleventh Amendment was  added  to  the
Constitution to prohibit a state from being sued in
federal court by citizens of another state or of an-
other nation.
In  1793  two  citizens  of South  Carolina  had
sued Georgia in the Supreme Court over property
confiscated  during  the  Revolution. The Georgia
legislature maintained that a sovereign state could
not  be  summoned  into  federal  court  and  ordered
to  defend  itself. When  Georgia  officials  refused 
to appear for the trial, the Supreme Court decided
against  the  state. Although Georgia  lost  the  court
case, it  won  its  power  strugg le  w ith  the  federal 

The Power of the Ballot

Civil Rights As this painting His First Vote by
Thomas Waterman Wood shows, African Ameri-
can men won the right to vote when the Fif-
teenth Amendment became law in February
1870. How did the Civil War amendments
expand civil rights in the nation?

CHAPTER 3: THE CONSTITUTION   87

084-093 CH03S4-860053  12/1/04  1:44 AM  Page 88

judiciary. The  day  after  the  Supreme  Cour t 
announced  its  decision  in Chisholm v. Georgia 1
Congress  introduced  an  amendment  to  limit  the
jurisdiction of the federal courts.
The Twelfth Amendment, added in 1804, cor-
rects  a  problem  that  had  arisen  in  the method  of
electing  the  president  and  v ice   president. This
amendment  provides  for  the  Electoral College  to
use separate ballots in voting for president and vice
president.

Civil War Amendments The second group of
amendments—Thirteen, Fourteen, and  Fifteen—
often are called the Civil War amendments because
they grew out of that great conflict.
The  Thirteenth  Amendment (1865)  outlaws
slavery, and  the  Fourteenth  Amendment (1868)
originally was  intended  to protect  the  legal  rights of

See the following footnoted materials in the Reference Handbook:
1. Chisholm v. Georgia  case summary, page 756. 

Other Constitutional Amendments
Other Constitutional Amendments
Amendments Date

11

12

13

14

15

16

17

18

19

20

21

22

23

24

25

26

27

1795

1804

1865

1868

1870

1913

1913

1919
1920

1933

1933

1951

1961

1964

1967

1971

1992

Purpose
Removed cases in which a state was sued without its consent from the 
jurisdiction of the federal courts
Required presidential electors to vote separately for president and vice president
Abolished slavery and authorized Congress to pass legislation implementing its 
abolition
Granted citizenship to all persons born or naturalized in the United 
States; banned states from denying any person life, liberty, or property 
without due process of law; and banned states from denying any person 
equal protection under the laws
Extended voting rights to African American males by outlawing denial of the right 
to vote on the basis of race, color, or previous condition of servitude
Empowered Congress to levy an income tax
Provided for the election of U.S. senators by direct popular vote instead of by the 
state legislatures
Authorized Congress to prohibit the manufacture, sale, and transportation of liquor

Extended the right to vote to women
Shortened the time between a presidential election and inauguration by 
designating January 20 as Inauguration Day; set January 3 as the date for the 
opening of a new Congress
Repealed the Eighteenth Amendment and empowered Congress to regulate the 
liquor industry
Limited presidents to two full terms in office

Granted voters in the District of Columbia the 
right to vote for president and vice president
Forbade requiring the payment of a poll tax to 
vote in a federal election
Provided for succession to the office of  
president in the event of death or incapacity 
and for filling vacancies in the office of vice 
president
Extended the right to vote to 18-year-olds
Banned Congress from increasing its members’ 
salaries until after the next election

Key
Amendments changing the 
powers of the national and 
state governments
Amendments changing  
government structure or 
function

Amendments extending 
the suffrage and power 
of voters

Critical Thinking
 
 
   The United States Constitution is the oldest active written constitution in 
the world, yet it has been amended only 27 times. Which amendments are known as the Civil 
War amendments?

88 CHAPTER 3: THE CONSTITUTION

084-093 CH03S4-860053  12/1/04  1:44 AM  Page 89

Amendments  in Practice

Present The Fourth Amendment 
protects citizens from unlawful 
searches and arrest by government
authorities.

▲

Past The Eighteenth Amendment
proved difficult to enforce and led 
to an illegal trade in alcohol. In 
Prohibition Raid, Thomas Hart 
Benton depicts police forcing the 
destruction of illegal alcohol.

▲

Enforcing Laws Explain
why the Eighteenth
Amendment may have
been more difficult to en-
force than the Fourth
Amendment.

the  freed  slaves  and  their  de-
scendants. Today  it protects  the
rights of citizenship  in general
by prohibiting a  state  from de-
priving any person of life, liber-
ty, or  property  without  “due
process  of law.” In  addition, it
states  that all  citizens have  the
right  to  equal protection of the  law  in all  states. The
Fifteenth Amendment (1870) prohibits the govern-
ment from denying a person’s right to vote on the basis
of race.
The Later Amendments The  third group of
amendments have all been added  in the twentieth
century. They  deal with  a  range  of topics  that  re-
flect the changes in modern American society.
The Sixteenth Amendment (1913) gives Con-
gress the power to levy individual income taxes. Al-
though  the  federal  government  had  collected
income taxes earlier, in 1895 the Supreme Court re-
versed  a  previous  decision  and  held  that  the  basic
features of the federal income tax were unconstitu-
tional. This  decision  prevented  passage  of another
income  tax  law  until  after  the  constitutional
amendment. The Seventeenth Amendment (1913)
states  that  the  people, instead  of state  legislatures,

elect United States sen-
ators. Congress had in-
troduced  amendments
for  a  direct  popular
election  of
senators
several  times  before.
However,
in  1912
charges  of vote  buying
in  state  legislatures  aided  in  the  passage  of this
amendment.
The Eighteenth Amendment (1919) prohibits
the manufacture, sale, or  transportation  of alco-
holic  beverages, concluding  a  crusade  to  abolish
the use of liquor that began  in the 1830s. The  fol-
lowing  year, the Nineteenth Amendment (1920)
guaranteed  women  the  right  to  vote. By  then
women had already won the right to vote in many
state elections, but the amendment put their right
to  vote  in  all  state  and  national  elections  on  a 
constitutional basis.
The  Twentieth Amendment (1933)  sets  new
dates for Congress to begin its term and for the in-
auguration  of the  president  and  v ice  president.
Under  the  original Constitution, elected  officials
who retired or who had been defeated remained in
office  for  several months. For  the  outgoing  presi-
dent, this period ran from November until March.

CHAPTER 3: THE CONSTITUTION 89

084-093 CH03S4-860053  12/1/04  1:44 AM  Page 90

Such outgoing officials had little influence and ac-
complished little, and they were called lame ducks
because  they  were  so  inactive. The  amendment 
addressed and in most cases solved this problem by
ending  the  terms  of senators  and  representatives
on  January  3, and  the  term  of the  president  on 
January  20  in  the  year  following  their November
elections.
The  Twenty-first Amendment (1933)  repeals
the  unsuccessful  Eighteenth  Amendment. The
Twenty-first Amendment, however, continued  to
ban  the  transport  of alcohol  into  any  state where
its possession violated state law.
The Twenty-second Amendment (1951)  lim-
its presidents to a maximum of two elected terms.
It was  passed  largely  as  a  reaction  to  Franklin D.
Roosevelt’s  election  to  four  terms  between  1933
and 1945.
The Twenty-third Amendment  (1961)  allows
citizens  liv ing  in  Washington, D.C., to  vote  for
president and vice president, a right previously de-
nied  residents  of the  nation’s  capital. The District
of Columbia  now  has  three  presidential  electors,
the number to which it would be entitled if it were
a state.
The  Twenty-fourth Amendment  (1964)  pro-
hibits poll taxes in federal elections—taxes paid in
order  to  vote. Prior  to  the  passage  of this  amend-
ment, some states had used such taxes to keep low-
income African Americans from voting.

The  Twenty-fifth Amendment (1967)  estab-
lishes  a  process  for  the  vice  president  to  take  over
leadership  of the  nation when  a  president  is  dis-
abled. It also sets procedures for filling a vacancy in
the  office  of the  vice  president. This  amendment
addresses  a  delicate  issue—when  should  a  presi-
dent  be  considered  unable  to  perform  the  duties 
of the  office? A  few  times  in  the  nation’s  history 
illness  prevented  a  president  from  performing his
official  duties. Should  the  vice  president  be  con-
sidered  president  during  this  time?  The  amend-
ment says that when a president—or vice president
with  the  support of the majority of the  cabinet—
writes  to  the  president  pro  tem  of the  Senate 
and  the  Speaker  of the House  expressing  the  in-
ability of the president to perform the duties of the
office, the vice president immediately becomes the
acting  president. In  a  conflict  between  the  presi-
dent  and  the  vice  president  over  this  issue, Con-
gress  must  decide  who  w ill  perform  the  duties 
of the office.
The Twenty-sixth Amendment (1971)  lowers
the  voting  age  in  both  federal  and  state  elections 
to 18.
The  Twenty-seventh  Amendment (1992)
makes congressional pay raises effective during the
term  following  their  passage. Originally  proposed
by  James Madison  in  1789, this  amendment  lin-
gered in obscurity for more than 200 years until it
was discovered by a university student.

S e c t i o n   4   A s s e s s m e n t
S e c t i o n   4   R e v i e w
S e c t i o n   4   A s s e s s m e n t
S e c t i o n   4   R e v i e w

Checking for Understanding
1. Main Idea In a table, categorize the 27 
amendments into the three major groups 
described in this section.
Constitutional Amendments

2. Define prior restraint, probable cause, search
warrant, arrest warrant, due process of law, 
eminent domain, lame duck, poll tax.
3. Identify Bill of Rights, Chisholm v. Georgia.
4. What rights are listed in the First Amendment?
5. Identify the twentieth-century amendments that
deal with voting rights.

90 CHAPTER 3: THE CONSTITUTION

Critical Thinking
6. Analyzing Information How do the amendments
to the Constitution preserve individual rights?

Growth of Democracy Amendments often re-
flect a change in society or a need for change
in the structure and power of government.
Write a report that identifies the reasons 
and events that led to the adoption of one 
of the 27 amendments. Present your findings
to the class.

084-093 CH03S4-860053  12/1/04  1:45 AM  Page 91

Article I

(Created)

Taking Notes
Effective note taking involves breaking up the
information into meaningful parts so that it
can be understood and remembered.
Learning the Skill
When taking notes, you must group facts into
a logical order. This order can be chronological—
that is, placing facts in order of what happened
first, next, and last. Or you may take notes based
on relationships between events—for example,
causes and effects or problems and solutions.
Before you take notes, skim the material.
What are the main points? You can take notes by
using any of the organizers listed below.
• Time Line—Notes on sequenced events
• Cause-and-Effect Chart—Identifies connec-
tions between events
• Semantic Web—Shows different aspects of a
general topic or theme
• Category Chart—Arranges data into specific
categories
• Outline—Identifies main ideas with sub-
heads under each main idea
Select  an  appropriate  method; paraphrase
your notes in short phrases.

?

I.

Practicing the Skill 
Read Section 2, pages 68–75, then answer 
the following questions.
1. Complete the web that follows; then state 
what information it gives you in two or three
complete sentences.
2. Complete the outline. What would be a good
title for it?
3. What new information does the outline 
provide that the web did not?

U.S. Constitution

?

?

?

(Created)

(Created)

Judicial Branch

A. Legislative branch
1. Senate
2.

B.

1. President
2. Vast federal bureaucracy
C. Judicial branch
1.
2.

Application Activity
Application Activity
Scan a local newspaper for a short edito-
rial or article about a branch of the national
or local government. Take notes by creating
an outline or graphic organizer. Summarize
the article using only your notes.

The Glencoe Skillbuilder
Interactive Workbook, Level 2
provides  instruction and practice
in key social studies skills.

91

084-093 CH03S4-860053  12/1/04  1:46 AM  Page 92

C h a p t e r   3
C h a p t e r   3
Assessment and Activities
4. The idea that the Supreme Court should play
an active role in shaping politics reflects the
philosophy of judicial restraint/judicial activism.

GOVERNMENT

Self-Check Quiz Visit the United States Government:
Democracy  in Action Web site at gov.glencoe.com and
click on Chapter 3–Self-Check Quizzes to prepare  for
the chapter test.

Reviewing Key Terms
Choose the italicized word or phrase that best
completes each of the following sentences.
1. The national government is divided into three
branches according to the principle of judicial
restraint/separation of powers.
2. All powers of Congress specifically listed in the
Constitution are expressed powers/reserved
powers.
3. According to the principle of judicial
review/eminent domain, the government can
force someone to sell his or her home to
make way for a highway.

Recalling Facts
1. Identify the six major principles of government
on which the Constitution is based.
2. What is the constitutional principle illustrated
by the division of the national government into
three branches?
3. In the Constitution, what right does the final
enumerated power give Congress?
4. Describe how an amendment to the Constitu-
tion is proposed and ratified.
5. In what ways may the Constitution be changed
informally?
Understanding Concepts
1. Constitutional Interpretations How has the sys-
tem of checks and balances caused the sepa-
ration of powers among the three branches of
government to become less distinct?

Major Principles of 
the Constitution
• Popular sovereignty
• Separation of powers
• Judicial review
• Federalism
• Checks and balances
• Limited government

Government
Established by
the Constitution

Legislative Branch
• Makes the  law
• Article I, Section 8, states the
expressed powers of Congress

Executive Branch
• Carries out acts of Congress
• Article II grants president broad but
vaguely described powers

Judicial Branch
• Interprets the  law
• Article III establishes Supreme Court
and allows Congress to set up 
lower courts 

C h a p t e r   3
C h a p t e r   3

Interpreting Political Cartoons Activity

084-093 CH03S4-860053  12/1/04  1:46 AM  Page 93

2. Separation of Powers How
did John Marshall help to
elevate the Supreme Court
to be equal to the other two
branches of government?
Critical Thinking
1. Understanding Cause and 
Effect Use the graphic 
organizer below to show 
two results of having a brief
Constitution that is a basic
framework, rather than a
specific plan, of government.

Brief Constitution

Result

Result

“Let’s never forget that the constitution provides for three 
equally important branches of government; the legislative 
and the other two.”

1. Which branch of government does the cartoonist imply is 
the most important?
2. Do you think the writers of the Constitution believed one
branch of government was more important? Explain your
answer.

2. Predicting Consequences How
would the federal system of
government be affected if
the Supreme Court did not
have the power of judicial 
review?
Analyzing Primary
Sources
The Magna Carta (1215), upon
which much of British law is
based, is the foundation of
some of the major principles of
the United States Constitution. Read the following
excerpt from the Magna Carta and answer the
questions that follow.

“(39) No free man shall be seized or imprisoned, or stripped
of his rights or possessions, or outlawed or exiled, . . . nor will
we proceed with force against him, . . . except by the lawful
judgement of his equals or by the law of the land. . . .
(63) IT IS ACCORDINGLY OUR WISH AND COM-
MAND that the English Church shall be free, and that
men in our kingdom shall have and keep all these liberties,
rights, and concessions, well and peaceably in their fulness
and entirety for them and their heirs. . . .
1. Why was it important to the creators of both
the Magna Carta and the Constitution to put
into writing the rights of citizens that the gov-
ernment was sworn to protect? 

2. Why did the writers of the Magna Carta and
the Bill of Rights want to make sure their docu-
ments prohibited the establishment of a state
religion? 

Participating  in 
Local Government
The First Amendment guarantees
freedom of assembly. Contact your
local government to find out its rules
about holding assemblies, such as political rallies,
meetings, or parades. Find out what restrictions
the community places on where and when the
assemblies take place. 

CHAPTER 3: THE CONSTITUTION 93

