094-102 CH04S1-860053  12/1/04  1:46 AM  Page 94

Federalism According to statistics,
Americans move an average of six times
during their lives, often from state to
state. What federal laws protect them
wherever they live? If you moved to a
new state, how might laws differ?

To learn more about how the
powers of the federal and
state governments affect your life, view
the Democracy in Action Chapter 4
video lesson:
The Federal System

★       ★       ★       ★       ★       ★       ★       ★       ★       ★

GOVERNMENT

Chapter Overview Visit the United States
Government: Democracy  in Action Web site
at gov.glencoe.com and click on Chapter
4—Overview to preview chapter  information.

94

094-102 CH04S1-860053  12/1/04  1:47 AM  Page 95

S e c t i o n   1
S e c t i o n   1
National and State Powers
Few  confrontations  between  the  state  and
Reader’s Guide
national  governments  are  as  dramatic  as
the  one  at  the  University  of Alabama  in
1963. Never theless, national  and  state
powers  have  been  continually  redefined  through
conflict, compromise, and  cooperation  since  the
earliest days of the  republic. How do  the different
levels of government cooperate?

Key Terms
delegated powers, expressed powers, implied 
powers, elastic clause, inherent powers, 
reserved powers, supremacy clause, concurrent
powers, enabling act
Find Out
■ What are the differences between the expressed
powers and the implied powers?
■ How does the overall power of the national 
government compare to that of the states? 
Understanding Concepts
Federalism In what ways does federalism provide
constitutional safeguards for the people?

Wa l lace  Comp l ies
TUSCALOOSA ,  A LABAMA ,   JUNE 1 9 6 3
W i t h   t h e   Na t i o n a l
G u a r d   o n   c am -
p u s , G o v e r n o r   G e o r g e
Wa l lace  re luc tan t ly  com -
p l i e d   w i t h   a   r e q u e s t   b y
G en e r a l  Hen r y  G r a h am
t o   s t e p   a s i d e   a n d   l e t
Wa l l a c e   a t t em p t s   t o
A f r i c a n   Am e r i c a n   s t u -
b l o c k   d e s e g r e g a t i o n
d e n t s   r e g i s t e r   a t   t h e
Un i v e r s i t y   o f A l a b am a .
D e f y i n g  a   f e d e r a l  co u r t  o rd e r, Wa l l a c e  h a d  s to o d   i n  a
d o o r w a y   a t   t h e   u n i v e r s i t y, b l o c k i n g   t w o   A f r i c a n
Am e r i c an   s t u d en t s . “ I  d en o un c e   an d   f o r b i d   t h i s   i l l e -
g a l   a n d   u nw a r r a n t e d   a c t i o n   by   t h e   C e n t r a l   G ove r n -
m e n t ,” Wa l l a c e   s t a t e d   a s   h e   r e f u s e d   to   m ove . Wh e n
P r e s i d en t  Kenn e d y  r e s p on d e d  by  f e d e r a l i z in g  t h e  A l -
a b am a  Na t i on a l  Gu a rd , t h e   g ove r n o r   b a c ke d   d ow n .

The Division of Powers
The Constitution  divided  government  au-
thority  by  giving  the  national  government
certain specified powers, reserving all other powers
to  the  states or  to  the people. In  addition, the na-
tional  and  state  governments  share  some  powers.
Finally, the Constitution  specifically  denied  some
powers to each level of government.
The Constitution  has  preserved  the  basic  de-
sign  of federalism, or  the  division  of government
powers, over  the  years. The American  concept  of
federalism, however, has  changed  greatly  since
1787.
Federalism  is  not  a  static  relationship  be-
tween  different  levels  of government. It  is  a  dy-
namic  concept  that  affects  everyday  decisions  at
all  levels. An  understanding  of federalism must
begin with the Constitution.

National Powers
The  Constitution  grants  three  types  of
power  to  the  national  government: ex-
pressed, implied, and  inherent  powers. Collec-
tively, these  powers  are  known  as  delegated
powers, powers the Constitution grants or dele-
gates to the national government.
Expressed Powers The expressed powers
are  those  powers  directly  expressed  or  stated 
in  the  Constitution  by  the  Founders. Most 
of these powers are  found  in  the  first  three ar-
ticles  of the Constitution. This  constitutional 

▲

National and state flags at Monument Valley, Utah

CHAPTER 4: THE FEDERAL SYSTEM 95

094-102 CH04S1-860053  12/1/04  1:47 AM  Page 96

authority  includes  the  power  to  levy  and  collect
taxes, to  coin money, to make  war, to  raise  an 
army and navy, and to regulate commerce among 
the  states. Expressed  powers  are  also  called 
enumerated powers.
Implied  Powers Those  powers  that  the  na-
tional  government  requires  to  carry  out  the  pow-
ers  that  are  expressly  defined  in  the Constitution
are  called  implied  powers. While  not  specifically
listed, implied  powers  spring  from  and  depend
upon  the  expressed  powers. For  example, the
power to draft people into the armed forces is im-
plied  by  the  power  given  to  the  government  to
raise an army and navy.
The basis for the  implied powers  is the neces-
sary and proper clause (Article I, Section 8). Often
called the elastic clause because it allows the pow-
ers of Congress to stretch, it says:
“ Congress shall have power . . . to make all
Laws which shall be necessary and proper
for carrying into Execution the Foregoing
powers, and all other powers vested . . . in
the Government of the United States. . . . ”
—Article I, Section 8

Implied powers have helped the national gov-
ernment  strengthen  and  expand  its  authority  to
meet many problems the Founders did not foresee.
Thus, Congress  has  used  the  implied  powers  to
regulate  nuclear  power  plants  and  to  develop  the
space program.
Inherent  Powers Those  powers  that  the  na-
tional  government may  exercise  simply  because  it
is  a  government  are  its  inherent  powers. For  ex-
ample, the national government must control im-
migration  and  establish  diplomatic  relations with
other countries, even though these powers are not
spelled out in the Constitution.

The States and the Nation
Some  people  felt  that  the  Constitution
granted too much power to the national gov-
ernment. In The  Federalist, No. 45, James Madison
argued  that  in  fact  it  granted  few  and  limited
powers  to  the  national  government  while  the
state’s  powers  were  many  and  broadly  drawn.
The Constitution  also  reserves  cer tain  powers
strictly  to  the  states. These  are  called  reserved
powers. While the Constitution does not list these

Displaying the Flag
W hether you display the American flag every
day, or only on holidays and special occa-
sions, certain laws and customs govern
the use of this symbol of national unity.
The flag is usually flown only from dawn to
dusk. If displayed at night, it should be lighted. In
a group of flags, the U.S. flag should be at the
center and higher than the others. Fly the flag at
half-staff on the death of a government official and
until noon on Memorial Day.
Inside, the flag may hang flat against the wall
behind a speaker, with the stars on the left. If on a
staff, it should be on the viewers’ left. Any other
flags should be placed to the right. The flag may
be flown upside down only to signal distress.
Remember that, as the symbol of the United
States, the flag should be treated with respect.

96

Never let it
touch the
ground. When
an American
flag becomes
too worn to dis-
play, it should
be destroyed in
a dignified way,
preferably by
burning.

Proudly displaying the flag

articipating
articipating
I N   G O V E R N M E N T  
I N   G O V E R N M E N T  

A C T I V I T Y
A C T I V I T Y

Flag Research What are  the  rules governing  flying
the  flag at half-staff? When was  the  last  time a
flag  flew at half-staff over your school?

094-102 CH04S1-860053  12/1/04  1:47 AM  Page 97

Division of Federal and State Powers
Division of Federal and State Powers

NATIONAL 
GOVERNMENT
(Expressed, Implied, 
and Inherent Powers)

NATIONAL and STATE 
GOVERNMENTS
(Concurrent 
Powers)

Regulate foreign and
interstate commerce
Coin money
Provide an army 
and navy
Declare war
Establish federal courts
below the Supreme Court
Conduct foreign relations
Exercise powers implied from 
the expressed powers

Levy taxes

Borrow money

Spend for general 
welfare

Establish courts

Enact and enforce 
laws

STATE 
GOVERNMENTS
(Reserved Powers)

Regulate intrastate 
commerce

Establish local 
government systems

Administer elections

Protect the public’s 
health, welfare, and 
morals

Critical Thinking
    The Constitution established a detailed plan for the distribution of power 
 
 
between the federal and state governments. What powers are shared by the national and 
state governments?

powers  specifically, it  grants  to   the  states  those
powers “not delegated  to  the United  States  by  the
Constitution, nor  prohibited  by   it  to  the  states.”
Thus  the states  have   authority  over matters  not
found  in the Constitution, such  as  the  regulation
of public school systems.
The  Supremacy  Clause What  happens
when states exceed their reserved powers and pass
laws that conflict with national laws? Which law is
supreme? Article VI, Section 2, of the Constitution
makes  the  acts  and  treaties  of the United  States
supreme. For this reason it is called the supremacy
clause. This clause states:
“ This Constitution, and the Laws of
the United States which shall be made 
in Pursuance thereof, and all treaties 
made . . . under the Authority of the 
United States, shall be the supreme 
Law of the Land; and the Judges in 
every State shall be bound thereby. ”
—Article VI, Section 2

No state law or state constitution may conflict
with  any  form  of national  law. Article VI  also  re-
quires  that  all  national  and  state  officials  and
judges be bound to support the Constitution. State
officials  are  not  permitted  to  use  their  state’s  re-
served powers to interfere with the Constitution.
States create local governments such as those of
cities and counties. As such, local governments get
their  powers  from  the  states. Hence, local  govern-
ments  are  also  bound  by   the  Constitution’s  su-
premacy clause—if a state is denied a certain power,
so, too, are the local governments within the state.
Concurrent Powers The  federal government
and the states also have certain concurrent powers.
Concurrent powers are those powers that both the
national  government  and  the  states  have. Each
level  of government  exercises  these  powers  inde-
pendently. Examples of concurrent powers are the
power to tax, to maintain courts and define crimes,
and to appropriate private property for public use.
Concurrently with  the  national  government, the
states may  exercise  any power not  reserved by  the

CHAPTER 4: THE FEDERAL SYSTEM 97

094-102 CH04S1-860053  12/1/04  1:48 AM  Page 98

Federal and State Cooperation

Concurrent Powers Members of both the Noble County
Sheriff’s Department and FBI agents lead convicted terrorist
Timothy McVeigh out of an Oklahoma courthouse. Why did
federal and state authorities have to cooperate after
the bombing of the federal building in Oklahoma City?

Guarantees to the States
The Constitution  obliges  the  national  gov-
ernment  to  do  three  things  for  the  states.
These three obligations are outlined in Article IV,
Sections 3 and 4.2
Republican  Form  of  Government
First, the  national  government  must
guarantee  each  state  a  republican  form
of government. Enforcement  of this
guarantee has become a congressional
responsibility. When Congress  allows
senators  and  representatives  from  a
state to take their seats in Congress, it is
in  effect  ruling  that  the  state  has  a  re-
publican form of government.
The  only  extensive  use  of
this 
guarantee  came  just  after  the  Civ il 
War. At that time, some Southern states
had  refused  to  ratify  the  Civ il  War
amendments  granting  citizenship
rights  to African Americans. Congress
ruled  that  these  states  did  not  have  a 
republican form of government. It refused to seat
senators  and  representatives  from  those  states
until the states ratified the Civil War amendments
and  changed  their  laws  to  recognize  Afr ican
Americans’ rights.
Protection Second, the  national  government
must protect states from invasion and domestic vi-
olence. An attack by a foreign power on one state is
considered an attack on the United States.
Congress  has  given  the  president  authority  to
send  federal  troops  to  put  down  domestic  disor-
ders when  state  officials  ask  for  help. In  the  sum-
mer  of 1967, for  example, President  Lyndon
Johnson  sent  troops  to  Detroit  to  help  control
racial  unrest  and  rioting . Johnson  did  so  after
Michigan’s governor declared that the Detroit po-
lice  and  the Michigan National Guard  could  not
cope with the widespread violence.
When national laws are violated, federal prop-
erty  is  threatened, or  federal  responsibilities  are 
interfered with, the president may send troops to a

See the following footnoted materials in the Reference Handbook:
1. The Constitution, pages 774 –799. 
2. The Constitution, pages 774 –799. 

Constitution  for  the  national  government. Of
course, state  actions must  not  conflict  w ith  any 
national laws.
Denied  Powers Finally,
the  Constitution
specifically denies some powers to all levels of gov-
ernment. Article  I, Section  9,1 enumerates  those
things the national government cannot do. For ex-
ample, the  national  government  cannot  tax  ex-
ports, and  it  cannot  interfere w ith  the  ability  of
states to carry out their responsibilities.
The next section of Article I presents a long list
of powers denied  to  the  states. No  state  can make
treaties or alliances with foreign governments. Nor
can  states  coin money, make  any  laws  impairing
the obligation of contracts, or grant titles of nobil-
ity. And states must have congressional permission
to collect duties on exports or imports or to make
agreements—called compacts—with other states.
Consistent with the belief in the sovereignty of
the people, the Constitution applies important lim-
itations to both the national and state governments.
These  restrictions, designed  to  protect  individual
liberties such as free speech and the rights of the ac-
cused, are set forth in Article I, Section 9, in the Bill
of Rights, and in several other amendments.

98 CHAPTER 4: THE FEDERAL SYSTEM

094-102 CH04S1-860053  12/1/04  1:48 AM  Page 99

state without  the  request  of local  authorities—or
even  over  local  objections. In  1894, for  example,
President Grover Cleveland  sent  federal  troops  to
Chicago to restore order during a strike of railroad
workers  even  though  the  governor  of Illinois  ob-
jected. During  the  strike, rioters  had  threatened
federal property and interfered with mail delivery.
During the 1950s and 1960s, Presidents Eisen-
hower  and Kennedy  used  this  power  to  stop  state
officials from blocking the integration of Southern
schools and universities. Eisenhower sent troops to
Little Rock, Arkansas, in  1957 when  local  officials
failed  to  integrate  public  schools. Kennedy  used
troops at the University of Mississippi in 1962 and
the University of Alabama in 1963.
The national government has extended its de-
finition  of domestic  v iolence  to  include  natural
disasters  such  as  earthquakes, floods, hurricanes,
and tornadoes. When one of these disasters strikes,
the  president  often  orders  troops  to  aid  disaster
victims. The  government  also  provides  low-cost
loans to help people repair damages.
Territorial Integrity Finally, the national gov-
ernment has  the duty  to  respect  the  territorial  in-
tegrity  of each  state. The  national  government
cannot use territory that is part of an existing state
to  create  a  new  state  unless  the  national  govern-
ment  has  permission  from  the  legislature  of the
state involved. The admission of West Virginia as a
state  in  1863 may  be  considered  an  exception  to
this rule.

Admission of New States
Thirty-seven  states  have  joined  the Union
since  the  original  13  formed  the  nation.
Most of these states became territories before tak-
ing  steps  to  gain  statehood. What  procedures  do
these territories then follow to become states? 
Congress Admits New States The Consti-
tution  gives  Congress  the  power  to  admit  new
states  to  the Union. There  are  two  restrictions  on
this  power. First, as  noted  earlier, no  state may  be
formed by taking territory from one or more states
without  the  consent  of the  states  involved  and  of
Congress. Second, acts  of admission, like  all  laws,
are subject to presidential veto.
The  procedure  for  admission  begins  when
Congress passes an enabling act. An enabling act,
when  signed  by  the  president, enables  the  people
of the  territory  interested  in  becoming  a  state  to
prepare a constitution. Then, after the constitution
has  been  drafted  and  approved  by  a  popular  vote
in the area, it is submitted to Congress. If Congress
is still agreeable, it passes an act admitting the ter-
ritory as a state.
Since the original 13 states formed the Union,
Congress  has  admitted  new  states  under  a  variety
of circumstances. Five states—Vermont, Kentucky,
Tennessee, Maine, and  West  Virg inia—were 
created  from  existing  states. Two  states, West 
Virginia and Texas, were admitted under unusual
circumstances.

Federal Troops Enforce the Constitution

Federal and State Struggles
After members of the Arkansas
National Guard prevented Eliza-
beth Ann Eckford from attending
Little Rock High School on Sep-
tember 4, 1957, President
Eisenhower sent federal troops
to forcibly integrate the school.
Analyze the role of the execu-
tive branch in protecting indi-
vidual rights. What authority
did the president have to
send federal troops to Little
Rock?

094-102 CH04S1-860053  12/1/04  1:48 AM  Page 100

Division of Powers

Federalism Guthrie
became a quiet town
after Oklahoma moved
its capital to Oklahoma
City, the state’s largest
metropolitan area. The
State Capitol has stood
in Oklahoma City since
1910. Why do state
authorities have the
power to determine
the state’s govern-
mental seat?

Oklahoma 
state seal

West  Virginia  was  created  from  40  western
counties of Virginia that broke away when Virginia
seceded from the Union. Some people have argued
that the admission of West Virginia was a violation
of the Constitution because  the Virginia  legislature
did not give its consent. Congress, however, accept-
ed the decision of the minority of the Virginia legis-
lature  that  represented  the  40 western  counties. It
held  that  the western  representatives were  the only
legal acting Virginia legislature at that time.
Texas  won  independence  from Mexico  and
sought annexation to the United States for several
years before being admitted. Antislavery members
of Congress opposed creation of a new slavehold-
ing state. Texas was annexed to the United States by
a  joint  resolution  of Congress  in  1845. The  joint
resolution  provided  for  immediate  statehood, al-
lowing  Texas  to  skip  the  territorial  period. It  also
stated that Texas could be divided into as many as
five states with the approval of both Texas and the
United States.
The  last  two states  to be admitted, Alaska and
Hawaii, shor tened  the  admission  process. They
each  adopted  a  proposed  constitution  w ithout
waiting for an enabling act. Both were admitted in
1959.
Puerto  Rico  has  considered  statehood  over  a
period of several decades. Puerto Ricans, however,
rejected statehood by a vote in 1993.

100 CHAPTER 4: THE FEDERAL SYSTEM

Conditions  for  Admission Congress  or  the
president may impose certain conditions before ad-
mitting a new state, including requiring changes in
the drafted constitution submitted by a territory. In
1911 President Taft  vetoed  the  congressional  reso-
lution  admitting Arizona  because he  objected  to  a
section in the Arizona constitution dealing with the
recall of judges. Arizona  then modified  the consti-
tution, and the next year it became the forty-eighth
state. When Alaska  entered  the  union  in  1959, it
was prohibited from ever claiming title to any lands
legally held by Native Americans or Aleuts in Alas-
ka. Ohio was  admitted  in  1803  on  the  condition
that for five years it not tax any public lands sold by
the national government within its borders.
The Supreme Court has ruled that the president
or Congress may  impose  conditions  for  admission
of a  state. Once  a  state  is  admitted, however, those
conditions may be enforced only  if they do not  in-
terfere with  the new  state’s  authority  to manage  its
own  internal  affairs. In  the  case of Arizona, once  it
was  admitted  as  a  state, it  promptly  amended  its
constitution to restore provisions about the recall of
judges that Taft had requested be deleted.
When Oklahoma was admitted  in 1907, Con-
gress forbade it to move its capital from the city of
Guthrie until 1913. The Supreme Court, however,
upheld the right of Oklahoma to move the capital
to Oklahoma City in 1911. The Court declared:

094-102 CH04S1-860053  12/1/04  1:49 AM  Page 101

“ The power to locate its own seat of govern-
ment, and to determine when and how it
shall be changed from one place to anoth-
er, and to appropriate its own public funds
for that purpose, are essentially and pecu-
liarly state powers. . . . Has Oklahoma
been admitted upon an equal footing with
the original states? If she has . . . [Okla-
homa] may determine for her own people
the proper location of the local seat of
government. ”—Justice Horace H. Lurton, 1911
Equality of the States Once admitted to the
Union, each  state  is equal  to every other  state and
has  rights  to  control  its  internal  affairs. No  state
has more  privileges  or  fewer  obligations  than  any
other. Each state is also legally separate from every
other state in the Union. All states in the Union are
bound to support the Constitution.

The National Governors’ 
Association
The National Governors’ Association (NGA)
supports  federalism  by  helping  governors 
in state policy making and in influencing national

policy. In 1908 President Theodore Roosevelt  first
called  the  nation’s  governors  together  to  discuss
conservation. After  that  the  governors  began  to
meet  regularly  as  the  Governors’ Conference  to
deal with a variety of issues. In the 1960s the gov-
ernors  set  up  a  permanent  organization with  an
office in Washington, D.C.
NGA  Helping  the  Governors In  the  1970s
the  renamed  National  Governors’ Association 
focused  on  helping  the  governors’ performance
within  their  own  states. The NGA  held  seminars
and published materials on  subjects  such as orga-
nizing the governor’s office, dealing with the press,
and  organizing  intergovernmental  relations. A 
series  of publications  focused  on  the  growing  in-
fluence  of states  and  governors  as  innovators.
Through  the NGA, states  shared  ideas  on  how  to
solve common problems.
NGA  Influencing  National  Policy Begin-
ning  in  the  1980s, governors  focused  their  atten-
tion on national policy concerns. The NGA and its
affiliates  addressed  educational, welfare, and
health-care reforms as well as the changing balance
in the federal system. Regional governors’ associa-
tions also became active in policy issues. By joining
together, the  governors were  becoming  a  big  part
of the national policy-making process.

articipating
articipating
I N   G O V E R N M E N T
I N   G O V E R N M E N T
Do we truly have government
by and for the people? If so,
how can citizens make their
opinions known? Can you work with-
in the system to change a law that
you believe is unjust?
Your opinion will carry more 
influence if you join with others.
Choose an appropriate means of
expressing your views. To question
a local ordinance, attend a city
council meeting. If you object to 

Working Within
the System

Contacting a legislator

a state law, write to your state leg-
islator. Petitions—formal requests
for specific action signed by many
people—are also effective. You
could write letters to the editor or
prepare an editorial for a local 
radio or television broadcast. The
Internet also offers an avenue
through which citizens can speak
out on an issue.
Activity
Choose an issue from an opin-
ion page of the local newspaper.
Express whether you strongly agree
or disagree in a letter to the news-
paper’s editor.

CHAPTER 4: THE FEDERAL SYSTEM 101

094-102 CH04S1-860053  12/1/04  1:49 AM  Page 102

Obligations  of  the  States The  states  per-
form  two  impor tant  functions  for  the  national
government. First, state  and  local  governments
conduct  and  pay  for  elections  of all national  gov-
ernment  officials—senators, representatives, and
presidential  electors. The Constitution  gives  state
legislatures the power to fix the “times, places, and
manner” of election  of senators  and  representa-
tives  (Article  I, Section  4). Under  the  same  provi-
sion, Congress  has  the  authority  to  alter  state
election laws should it so desire.
In  addition, the  states  play  a  key  role  in  the
process  of amending  the Constitution. According
to the document, no amendment can be added to
the Constitution unless three-fourths of the states
approve it.

The Courts as Umpire
Because  federalism  div ides  the  powers  of
government, conflicts  frequently  arise  be-
tween national  and  state  governments. By  settling
such disputes, the federal court system, particular-
ly the Supreme Court, plays a key role as an umpire
for  our  federal  system. The  question  of national
versus  state  power  arose  early  in  our  nation’s  his-
tory. In 1819, in the landmark case of McCulloch v.
Maryland,1 the Supreme Court ruled on a conflict
between  a  state  government  and  the  national 
government. In making the decision, the Supreme
Cour t  held  that  in  the  instance  of a  conflict 

between the national government and a state gov-
ernment, the national government is supreme.
Since  McCulloch, the  Supreme  Cour t  has
made many  rulings on  the  constitutional division
of power  between  the  national  and  state  govern-
ments. The Court’s view of this division has shifted
through  the  years  depending  on  the  mood  of
the nation and on the number of conservative and
liberal  justices  on  the Court. Early  in  its  history,
the Court usually favored states’ power. During the
Depression  and  the  civ il  rights  movement,
the Cour t  tended  to  favor  a  strong  national
government. Since  the  1990s, a  narrow majority
of conservative  justices  has  again  generally  ruled
in favor of the states. For example, in United States
v. Lopez (1995), the Court held  that Congress had
exceeded  its  authority over  the  states by passing  a
law banning gun possession in or near schools.
Federal judges also serve as umpires of federal-
ism  when  they  rev iew  the  actions  of state  and
local governments. In  recent  decades  the  power
of federal judges has increased because of modern
interpretations  of the  Four teenth  Amendment,
which  prohibits  states  from  depriving  any  person
of life, liberty, or property without “due process of
law.” Broad  interpretation  of these words makes
nearly every action by state and local officials open
to questioning by a federal judge.

See the following footnoted materials in the Reference Handbook:
1. McCulloch v. Maryland case summary, page 761. 

S e c t i o n   1   A s s e s s m e n t
S e c t i o n   1   A s s e s s m e n t

implied

inherent

expressed

Checking for Understanding
1. Main Idea Using a graphic 
organizer like the one at 
the right, give an example 
of each kind of power 
granted to the national 
government.
2. Define delegated powers, expressed powers, 
implied powers, elastic clause, inherent powers,
reserved powers, supremacy clause, concurrent
powers, enabling act.
3. Identify necessary and proper clause, McCulloch
v. Maryland.
4. What kinds of powers may states exercise?

Critical Thinking
5. Making Comparisons How do the obligations 
of the national government to states compare 
to obligations of states to the national 
government?

Federalism New states coming into the Union
have had to follow a process established by
Congress. Beginning with the enabling act
passed by Congress, create a flow chart that
shows the dates and conditions by which your
state was admitted to the Union.

102 CHAPTER 4: THE FEDERAL SYSTEM

103-105 CH04S2-860053  12/1/04  1:49 AM  Page 103

S e c t i o n   2
S e c t i o n   2
Relations Among the States
The Constitution, in establishing the feder-
Reader’s Guide
al system, defined not only national-state
relations  but  also  relations  among  the
states. Conflicts and jealousies among the
states  had  been  a  major  reason  for  drafting  the
Constitution  in  1787. One way  the Constitution
dealt with  this problem was  to  strengthen  the na-
tional government. The second way was  to set  the
legal  ground  rules, such  as  extradition, for  rela-
tions  among  the  states. Because  each  state  retains
much power and independence, these rules help to
assure cooperation among the states.

Key Terms
extradite, civil law, interstate compact
Find Out
■ What provisions in Article IV of the Constitution
attempt to provide for cooperation among the
various state governments?
■ What are some of the purposes of interstate
compacts? 
Understanding Concepts
Federalism Why is it necessary that the 
Constitution require states to cooperate with 
one another?

Conv ic t  Goes  Free
TALLAHASSEE ,   F LOR IDA ,  OCTOBER 1 9 9 6
A 6 4 - y e a r - o l d   c o n v i c t ,
w h o   e s c a p e d   f r om   a
F l o r i d a   p r i s o n   i n   1 9 5 2 ,
b u t   h a s   b e e n   a   m o d e l   c i t i -
i s   o f f i c i a l l y  
s i n c e ,
z e n  
f r e e . Wh e n   E d d i e   B r ow n ,
o f B r o o k l y n , N e w   Yo r k ,
w a s   s t o p p e d   f o r   a   t r a f f i c
v i o l a t i o n   r e c e n t l y, a   r o u -
t i n e   ch e c k   r e ve a l e d   h im   to
b e   a   l o n g - s o u g h t   f u g i t i v e .
N o   l o n g e r   n e e d e d
O r i g in a l l y  B row n  h ad  b e en
s e r v i n g   a   5 - y e a r   s e n t e n c e
f o r   ro bb e r y   i n  F l o r i d a . Wh e n  h e  w a s   c a u g h t , F l o r i d a
o f f i c i a l s   a t   f i r s t   w a n t e d   B row n   r e t u r n e d   to   s e r v e   h i s
r em a i n i n g   s e n t e n c e . How e v e r, a f t e r   h e a r i n g   a b o u t
t h e   m o d e l   l i f e   B r ow n   h a d   l e d   d u r i n g   h i s   y e a r s   o f
f r e e d om , F l o r i d a  g o v e r n o r  L aw to n  C h i l e s  d i sm i s s e d
t h e   o rd e r   to   e x t r a d i t e   h im .

Interstate Relations
Article  IV  of the Constitution  requires  the
states to do the following: (1) give “full faith
and  credit” to  the  laws, records, and  court  deci-
sions of other states; (2) give one another’s citizens
all  the “privileges  and  immunities” of their  own
citizens; and  (3)  extradite—that  is, return  to  a
state—criminals  and  fugitives  who  flee  across
state lines to escape justice.
Full  Faith  and  Credit The  Constitution
states that “full faith and credit” shall be given in
each state to the public acts, records, and judicial
proceedings of every other state. In other words,
each state must recognize the laws and legal pro-
ceedings  of the  other  states. For  example, a  car
registration of one  state must be accepted by all
the other states. This clause applies only  to civil
law, or  laws  relating  to  disputes  between  indi-
viduals, groups, or with the state. One state can-
not enforce another state’s criminal laws.
The need for this kind of rule in the federal
system  is  obvious. Without  it, each  state  could
treat all other states like foreign countries. Fur-
ther, each  state  could become  a haven  for peo-
ple  who  decided  to move  to  another  state  to
avoid their legal duties and responsibilities.
The  coverage  of the “full  faith  and  credit”
rule  is  quite  broad. Public  acts refers  to  civ il

CHAPTER 4: THE FEDERAL SYSTEM 103

103-105 CH04S2-860053  12/1/04  1:50 AM  Page 104

Nonresidents’ Rights

Citizens  in  the  several  States.” As  inter-
preted by the Supreme Court, this clause
means  that  one  state may  not  discrimi-
nate unreasonably against citizens of an-
other  state. It must  provide  citizens  of
other states the same privileges and  im-
munities it provides its own citizens.
The courts have never given a com-
plete listing of “privileges and immuni-
ties.” Included, however, are  rights  to
pass through or live in any state; use the
cour ts; make  contracts; buy, sell, and
hold property; and marry.
On the other hand, states may make
reasonable  discrimination  against  non-
residents. The  privileges  and  immuni-
ties  clause  does  not  apply  to  voting ,
serving on juries, or using certain public
facilities. Some states require that a person
live  in  a  state  for  a  cer tain  amount  of
time  before  becoming  a  voter  or  public
official. States may  also  require  individ-
uals  to  establish  residency  before  they
can  practice  such  professions  as medi-
cine, dentistry, or law.
In  addition, nonresidents  do  not
have  the  same  right  to  attend  publicly
supported  institutions  such  as  schools
or  to  use  state  hospitals  as  do  residents
of the  state. Nonresidents  may  be  re-
quired  to  pay  higher  fees  for  hunting  or  fishing 
licenses than residents. State colleges and universi-
ties may, and usually do, charge higher tuition fees
to students  from other states  than  they do  to resi-
dent students.
Extradition Because  states  are  basically  inde-
pendent of one another, some means  is needed  to
prevent  criminals  from  escaping  justice  simply by
going  from  one  state  to  another. For  this  reason,
the Constitution provides:
“ A person charged in any state with trea-
son, felony, or other crime, who shall flee
from justice, and be found in another
State, shall, on demand of the executive
authority of the State from which he fled,
be delivered up, to be removed to the State
having jurisdiction of the crime. ”
—Article IV, Section 2

Reasonable Discrimination It is often more expensive
for residents of one state to attend an out-of-state public
college. Why do you think states charge out-of-state
students higher tuition fees?

laws  passed  by  state  legislatures. Records means
such  documents  as  mor tgages, deeds,
leases,
wills, marriage licenses, car registrations, and birth
certificates. The  phrase  judicial  proceedings refers
to various court actions  such as  judgments  to pay
a debt.
Judicial  decisions  in  civil matters  in  one  state
will be honored and enforced in all states. If, for ex-
ample, a person in Texas loses a lawsuit requiring a
specific  payment, and moves  to  Illinois  to  avoid
paying  the money, Illinois  courts will  enforce  the
Texas decision.
Privileges  and  Immunities The  Founders
knew  that when  citizens  traveled  between  states,
they might  be  discriminated  against. A  citizen  of
Delaware, for example, might be treated as an alien
in Virginia  or Maryland. Therefore, the Constitu-
tion provides  that “the Citizens of each State shall
be  entitled  to  all  Priv ileges  and  Immunities  of

104 CHAPTER 4: THE FEDERAL SYSTEM

103-105 CH04S2-860053  12/1/04  1:50 AM  Page 105

This  clause  prov ides  for  the  extradition  of
fugitives. Congress  has made  the  governor  of the
state to which fugitives have fled responsible for re-
turning them.
The Supreme Court has softened the meaning
of the extradition provision by ruling that a gover-
nor  is not  required  to  return a  fugitive  to another
state. Although  extradition  is  routine  in  the  vast
majority  of cases, occasionally  a  governor  w ill
refuse. For example, a Michigan governor once re-
fused to return a fugitive to Arkansas because, the
governor said, prison conditions in Arkansas were
inhumane. Arkansas  officials  could  do  nothing
about the governor’s decision. In recent years Con-
gress has acted to close the extradition loophole by
making  it a  federal crime  to  flee  from one state  to
another in order to avoid prosecution for a felony.
Interstate  Compacts The Constitution  re-
quires the states to settle their differences with one
another  w ithout  the  use  of force. The  principal
way in which states may do this is to negotiate in-
terstate  compacts. Such  compacts  are  written
agreements  between  two  or more  states. The  na-
tional  government  or  foreign  countries may  also
be part of an interstate compact.
Congress must  approve  interstate  compacts.
This requirement prevents states from threatening
the Union by making alliances among themselves.
Once a compact has been signed and approved by
Congress, it  is  binding  on  all  states  signing  it. Its
terms are enforceable by the Supreme Court.
Before  1900, only  13  interstate  compacts  had
received  congressional  approval. Most  of them 

involved boundary disputes between states. As soci-
ety has become more complex, however, the num-
ber  of compacts  sent  to Congress  has  increased.
Today nearly 200 compacts are in force.
States use compacts  to deal with  such matters
as  air  and  water  pollution, pest  control, toll
bridges, and  transportation. New  Jersey  and New
York helped start this trend in 1921 when they cre-
ated  the  Port  of New York Authority  to  develop
and  manage  harbor  facilities  in  the  area. Many
compacts  today  deal  w ith  the  development  and
conservation  of natural  resources. Others  deal
with the transport and disposal of hazardous waste
materials. Interstate compacts have become an im-
por tant  way  for  the  states  to  deal  w ith  regional
problems.
Lawsuits Between States Sometimes states
are  unable  to  resolve  their  disputes  by  these  or
other methods. When  this  happens, an  interstate
lawsuit may result. Since 1789 more  than 220 dis-
putes between states have wound up in court. Suits
among two or more states are heard in the United
States Supreme Court, the only court in which one
state may sue another.
States bring one another to court for a variety
of reasons. Cases  in  the West  often  involve water
rights. Arizona, California, and  Colorado  have
gone to the Court in disputes over water from the
Colorado River. Other  cases have  involved  sewage
from one state polluting the water in another state.
Still  other  cases  are  disputes  over  boundary  lines.
Arkansas  and  Tennessee  had  such  a  dispute  as 
recently as 1970.

S e c t i o n   2   A s s e s s m e n t
S e c t i o n   2   A s s e s s m e n t

Checking for Understanding
1. Main Idea In a chart, list three ways states treat
nonresidents differently and the same as residents.
Treated differently
Treated the same
1.
2.
3.
2. Define extradite, civil law, interstate compact.
3. Identify “full faith and credit,” “privileges and 
immunities.”
4. What three constitutional provisions are aimed 
at promoting cooperation among the states?

Critical Thinking
5. Understanding Cause and Effect What environ-
mental problems could interstate compacts 
address, and what solutions could they achieve?

Federalism Imagine you have moved to a new
state. Find out if and how a driver’s license,
automobile registration, and voting registration
are changed. Write a report on your findings.

CHAPTER 4: THE FEDERAL SYSTEM 105

106-111 CH04S3-860053  12/1/04  1:50 AM  Page 106

Key Terms
states’ rights position, nationalist position, 
income tax
Find Out
■ Compare the view of the federal government as
seen by a states’ rightist and a nationalist.
■ What events show that federalism has been 
dynamic rather than static since the 1960s?
Understanding Concepts
Federalism How do national crises, such 
as war, tend to shift power to the national 
government? 

S e c t i o n   3
S e c t i o n   3
Developing Federalism
The roles of state and national government
Reader’s Guide
officials  have  been  defined  during  two
centuries  of developing  federalism. Early
Federalists  such  as  John  Jay  and Alexan-
der Hamilton  had  to  convince  the  people  in  the
states  that  the new  federalism of the Constitution
was  better  than  the  old  confederacy. While  they
deeply  believed  that  the  United  States  needed  a
strong  central  government  to  surv ive, they  also
knew that many people feared the centralization of
power. The  colonial  experience with  the power of
British  government  was  still  fresh  in  people’s
minds.
Alexander Hamilton wrote:
“ The proposed Constitution, so far from
implying an abolition of the State govern-
ments, makes them constituent parts of the
national sovereignty, by allowing them a
direct representation in the Senate, and
leaves in their possession certain exclusive
and very important portions of sovereign
power. This fully corresponds . . . with the
idea of a federal government. ”
—Alexander Hamilton, 1787
While Hamilton’s basic definition of federal-
ism remains true, interpretations of how federal-
ism  affects  national-state  relationships  have
changed  since  1787  and will  no  doubt  continue
to do so.

States’ Rightists 
Versus Nationalists
Throughout  American  history, there
have  been  two  quite  different  v iews  of
how federalism should operate. One view—the
states’ rights  position—favors  state  and  local
action  in  dealing  w ith  problems. A  second
v iew—the  nationalist  position—favors  na-
tional action in dealing with these matters.

Shopp ing   the  Ne t  
WASH INGTON ,  D .C . ,  MARCH 1 9 ,   1 9 9 8  
T h e   Na t i o n a l   G o v e r n o r s ’ A s s o c i a t i o n   (N G A )
a n d   o t h e r   g ro u p s   r e p r e s e n t i n g   l o c a l   o f f i c i a l s
h ave   d e c i d e d   to   s u p p o r t   n a t i o n a l   l e g i s l a t i o n   t h a t
t em p o r a r i l y   b a n s   s a l e s   t a x e s   o n
In t e r n e t   t r a n s a c t i o n s . T h e   a n -
n o u n c em e n t   m a r k s   a   m a j o r
p o l i c y   c h a n g e   f o r   t h e   N G A .
E a r l i e r, t h e   g r o u p   h a d   a s k e d
C o n g r e s s   t o   g i v e   s t a t e s   t h e
I n t e r n e t   U s e r  
r i g h t   t o   c o l l e c t   s a l e s   t a x e s   o n
I n t e r n e t   c omm e r c e   b a s e d   o n
t h e   t a x   r a t e s   o f c u s tom e r s ’ h om e   s t a t e s . T h e  NGA
a g r e e d   to  a   t h r e e - y e a r  d e l ay  o n   In t e r n e t   t a xe s  a f t e r
n e g o t i a t in g   w i t h   con g r e s s i on a l   s u p p o r t e r s   o f l e g -
i s l a t i o n   b a n n i n g   t h e   t a xe s . To   g a i n   t h e   g ove r n o r s ’
s u p p o r t , t h e   b i l l ’s   a u t h o r s   a g r e e d   t o   r e d u c e   t h e
l en g t h   o f t h e   d e l ay   f rom   s i x   to   t h r e e   y e a r s .

106 CHAPTER 4: THE FEDERAL SYSTEM

106-111 CH04S3-860053  12/1/04  1:50 AM  Page 107

The  States’  Rights  Position The  states’
rights  view  holds  that  the Constitution  is  a  com-
pact  among  the  states. States’ rightists  argue  that
the  states  created  the  national  government  and
gave  it  only  certain  limited  powers. Any  doubt
about whether a power belongs to the nation-
al  government  or  is  reserved  to  the  states
should be settled in favor of the states. Because
the  national  government  is  an  agent  of the
states, all of its powers should be narrowly defined.
States’ rights  supporters  believe  state  govern-
ments  are  closer  to  the  people  and  better  reflect
their wishes  than  the  national  government. They
tend to see the government in Washington, D.C., as
heavy-handed and a threat to individual liberty.
At various points  in United States history, the
Supreme  Cour t  has  accepted  this  v iew. Under
Chief Justice  Roger  B. Taney (1836 –1864), the
Court often supported states’ rights against powers
of the  national  government. The  same was  true
from 1918 to 1936, when the Court ruled new fed-
eral laws attempting to regulate child labor, indus-
try, and  agriculture  in  the  states unconstitutional.
During these times, the Court largely ignored John
Marshall’s  principle  of implied  powers  set  out  in
McCulloch v. Maryland. Instead, it  based  its  deci-
sion on the Tenth Amendment, which says powers
not  delegated  to  the  national  government  are  re-
served to the states or the people.
The  Nationalist  Position The  nationalist
position  re jects  the  idea  of the  Constitution  as
merely  a  compact  among  the  states. Nationalists
deny  that  the  national  government  is  an  agent  of
the  states. They  argue  that  it was  the  people, not
the  states, who  created  both  the  national  govern-
ment  and  the  states. Therefore, the  national  gov-
ernment is not subordinate to the states.
Nationalists believe the powers expressly dele-
gated  to  the  national  government  should  be  ex-
panded as necessary to carry out the people’s will.
They  hold  that  the “necessary  and  proper” clause
of the Constitution means  that Congress  has  the
right  to  adopt  any means  that  are  convenient  and
useful to carry out its delegated powers. They also
claim that the reserved powers of the states should
not limit how the national government can use its
own powers.
Nationalists  believe  the  national  government
stands for all the people, while each state speaks for

The 51st State? Puerto Ricans hotly
debate their political future. Though they are
U.S. citizens and must follow U.S. laws, they
lack some rights of mainland Americans, such
as the right to vote in presidential elections. If
Puerto Rico became a state, residents would
have to pay federal income taxes, but they
would also acquire all the rights U.S. citizens
have. Those in favor of Puerto Rican
independence fear that statehood would force
them to speak English and could weaken their
heritage. Some claim that commonwealth
status gives Puerto Ricans the best of both
worlds. They are U.S. citizens 
and have militar y protection,
but they retain their rich 
Spanish culture. In the 
past 30 years, public 
support for statehood has 
increased on the island.

only part of the people. They  look  to  the national
government to take the lead in solving major social
and economic problems facing the nation.
The  Supreme Court  established  the nationalist
position in 1819 in McCulloch v. Maryland, but it re-
ally  gained  ground  in  the  Court  during  the  late
1930s. At  that  time, the Great Depression  gripped
the nation. The national  government under Presi-
dent Franklin D. Roosevelt  responded by  starting
new  social welfare  and public works programs. At
first, the Court ruled these programs were unconsti-
tutional. As the Depression grew worse, however, the
Court adjusted its views. It supported the expansion
of the national government’s powers in order to deal
with the nation’s terrible economic problems.

Growing National Government
A major factor shaping the development of
American  federalism  has  been  the  growth
in the size and power of the national government.

CHAPTER 4: THE FEDERAL SYSTEM 107

106-111 CH04S3-860053  12/1/04  1:51 AM  Page 108

Over  the  years  this  expansion  came  largely  at  the
expense of the states.
A key reason for the change is that the Consti-
tution’s flexibility has allowed the Supreme Court,
Congress, and the president to stretch the govern-
ment’s powers  to meet  the needs of a modern  in-
dustrial  nation. The  expansion  of the  national
government’s  powers  has  been  based  on  three
major constitutional provisions: (1)  the war pow-
ers; (2) the power to regulate interstate commerce;
and (3) the power to tax and spend.
War  Powers The  national  government  has
power  to wage war. This  authority  has  greatly  ex-
panded  the  federal  government’s  power  because,
in  today’s world, national  defense  involves more
than  simply  putting  troops  in  the  field. Such  fac-
tors  as  the  condition  of the  economy  and  the
strength  of the  educational  system  can  affect  the
nation’s military capabilities.
Commerce  Power The  Constitution  gives
Congress  the  authority  to  regulate  commerce.
Supreme Court decisions have expanded this power.
The  cour ts  today  consistently  interpret  the
term  commerce to mean  nearly  all  activities  con-
cerned with  the  production, buying, selling, and
transpor ting  of goods. For  example, Congress
passed  the  Civ il  Rights  Act  of 1964 forbidding

racial  discrimination  in  public  accommodations
such  as  hotels  and  restaurants. In  upholding  this
law  the  Supreme Court  reasoned: (a)  racial  dis-
crimination  by  innkeepers  and  restaurant  owners
makes  it  difficult  for  the  people  discriminated
against  to  travel  and  thus  restricts  the  flow  of in-
terstate commerce; (b) Congress has  the power  to
regulate  commerce; (c)  therefore, Congress may
pass laws against racial discrimination.
Taxing Power Congress has no specific consti-
tutional authority to pass laws to promote the gen-
eral welfare. Congress does, however, have authority
to raise taxes and spend money for such purposes.
The  Sixteenth Amendment, ratified  in  1913,
gave Congress  the  power  to  tax  incomes. The  in-
come  tax lev ied  on  indiv idual  earnings  has  be-
come  the major  source of money  for  the national
government. It has given the national government
much greater  financial resources than any state or
local government has.
Finally, Congress has used  its  taxing power  to
increase  the  national  government’s  authority  in
two ways. First, taxes may be used to regulate busi-
nesses. For  example, Congress has put  such heavy
taxes  on  certain  dangerous  products  that  it  is  not
profitable  for  companies  to make  and  sell  them.
Second, Congress may use taxes to influence states
to  adopt  certain  kinds  of programs. Federal  law 

Congressional Desegregation

Civil Rights In 1940, many
businesses discriminated
against African Americans.
Congress used its commerce
power to desegregate busi-
nesses such as this cafe in
Durham, North Carolina.
How is the com-
merce power of
Congress related
to desegregation?

Fighting 
segregation

108 CHAPTER 4: THE FEDERAL SYSTEM

106-111 CH04S3-860053  12/3/04  10:05 AM  Page 109

allows  employers  to  deduct  from
their  federal  taxes  any  state  taxes
they  pay  to   suppor t  state  unem-
ployment  programs. This  federal
tax  break  helped  persuade  all  the
states  to  set  up  their  own  unem-
ployment insurance programs.

Number of Government Units
Number of Government Units

125

100

s
t
i
n
U
 
t
n
e
)
s
m
d
n
n
a
r
e
s
u
v
o
o
h
G
t
 
 
f
n
o
i
(
 
r
e
b
m
u
N

75

25

50

Federal Aid to 
the States
As the national government
has  grown  and  enlarged  its
powers, Congress  has  developed
two  major  ways  to  influence  the
policies  of state  and  local  govern-
ments. The  first  is  by  providing
money  through  various  federal
grants. The  second  is  by  imposing
mandates  that  take  away, or  pre-
empt, the  ability  of state  and  local
governments  to  make  their  own
policies.
Types of Federal Aid The na-
tional  government  has  always  provided  different
types  of aid  to   the  states. In  1862, for instance,
Congress passed a law giving nearly 6 million acres
of public land to the states for support of colleges.
Since  the 1950s, federal aid  to  state and  local gov-
ernments has increased tremendously.
The main way  the  national  government  pro-
v ides  money  to   the  states  is  through  federal
grants. These are sums of money given to state or
local governments to be spent for a variety of spe-
cific purposes. For  example, federal money might
go to a city to help  improve airport runways or to
a state for building new roads.
Federal grants redistribute  income among the
states. Taxes  are  collected  by   the  federal  govern-
ment from citizens in all fifty states; this money is
then  allocated  through  grants  to   people  in  other
states. In this way, federal grants have often worked
to  help  reduce  inequalities  between wealthy  and
less wealthy  states. The  process  of deciding  how
grant money is allocated can be very political, with
states  and  their  representatives  in Congress  com-
peting fiercely to get as large a share as possible.

2002

Federal
State
Local
  Counties
  Municipalities
  Townships and towns
  School districts
  Special districts
Total Government Units

1
50

3,034
19,431
16,506
13,522
35,356
87,900

1962

1972

1982

1992

2002

Year

1952

Source: U.S. Bureau of the Census.

Critical Thinking
 
   From 1952 to 1972, the total number of 
 
local governments in the United States decreased by 
38,487. What type of local government is most numerous?

States and local offices have learned that along
w ith  more   federal  aid  comes  federal  control
and red  tape. This  is  because  many  federal  aid
programs provide money only if the state and local
authorities  are willing  to  meet  conditions  set  by
Congress.
Preemption  Laws Since  the mid 1960s, Con-
gress  has  used  preemption, or  the  power  to  
assume responsibility for a state government func-
tion, in  order  to   gain  authority   over  a  state. For
example, Congress passed the Nutritional Labeling
and  Education Act  in  1990  to   establish  national
food  labeling  standards. This  law  took  away
the power  of indiv idual  states  to  set  their  own
requirements, even  if those  requirements  were
more strict than the new national standards.
Preemption  laws  limit  the  authority   of state
and  local  governments  through  restraints  and
mandates. A restraint is a requirement set by Con-
gress  that  prohibits  a  local  or  state  government
from  exercising  a  certain  power. A  mandate is  a
federal  order  requiring  states  to  provide  a  service

CHAPTER 4: THE FEDERAL SYSTEM 109

106-111 CH04S3-860053  12/1/04  1:51 AM  Page 110

Federal Revenue Returns 
Federal Revenue Returns 
to the States, 2002
to the States, 2002

87¢

98¢

$1.67

$1.06

$1.31

74¢

76¢

$1.14

78¢

$2.07

$1.61

$1.19

$1.21

$2.37

$1.52

77¢

88¢

88¢

$1.13

66¢

85¢

$1.23

77¢

$1.00

$1.13

$1.34

$1.09

$1.03

$1.82

$150
$1.07
$1.34
$1.01

$1.50
$1.26

$1.55
$1.89

$1.64

$1.91

$1.57

92¢

$1.48

$1.01

For each dollar of federal taxes sent to Washington, D.C.:
$1.00 or more of federal spending returned
99¢ or less of federal spending returned

*District of Columbia
Source: Tax Foundation, Washington, D.C.

                            Federal revenue received from the states is 
not returned equally to the states. Which state receives the 
highest federal returns? The lowest? 

62¢

85¢

$1.34

$1.22
$6.44*

75¢
$1.08
65¢

and  alter  curbs  on  sidewalks
to better  accommodate  the  physi-
cally  challenged. Federal  preemp-
tion  laws  address  issues  such  as
setting water  quality  and  clean  air
standards  and  protecting  civ il
rights.
Advocates  of
states’ rights
dislike  the  use  of preemption
because these laws may prevent the
enforcement of a state or local  law.
They  also  can interfere  with
the ability of local and state govern-
ments  to  set  priorities  for  them-
selves. Finally, preemption  laws do
not require Congress to pay for new
mandates. Congress  can  therefore
establish  new  programs  and
regulations and pass  the burden of
paying for them to the states.
The  balance  of power  in  the
federal  system  has  shifted  from
time  to  time. Presidents  Ronald
Reagan and George H.W. Bush put
in  place  several  policies  that
turned the responsibility for many
federal programs over to state and
local  governments. The  total
amount  of federal  aid  given  to  the  states  declined
as well. The relationship between federal and state
governments  is  dynamic  and  is  affected  by  the
policies of the president and of Congress.

or  undertake  an  activity  in  a  manner  that  meets
minimum national  standards  set by Congress. The
Americans  With  Disabilities  Act, for  example,
required state and local governments to build ramps

Checking for Understanding
1. Main Idea Using a graphic organizer like the one
below, identify three constitutional provisions that
have been the basis for the tremendous growth
of the national 
National Government
government.
2. Define states’ rights position, nationalist 
position, income tax.
3. Identify Chief Justice Roger B. Taney, Civil
Rights Act of 1964, “New Federalism.”
4. In what two ways has Congress used its taxing
power to increase the national government’s 
authority?

110 CHAPTER 4: THE FEDERAL SYSTEM

S e c t i o n   3   A s s e s s m e n t
S e c t i o n   3   A s s e s s m e n t
Critical Thinking
5. Making Comparisons Analyze the major differ-
ence between the states’ rights and the nation-
alist views of federalism.

Federalism Write an opinion paper stating
your position on the following question: Should
the national government distribute money to
states today with “no strings attached,” or
should the money be directed toward specific
programs? Explain your position.

106-111 CH04S3-860053  12/1/04  1:51 AM  Page 111

CASES TO DEBATE

Philadelphia v. State 
of New Jersey, 1978
Americans take for
granted the right to
unrestricted travel
from one state to another. If we make a purchase outside our home
state, we know we can transport it home without paying a duty or
fee. Are  there any limits to traffic among the states? The case of
City of Philadelphia v. State of New Jersey addressed this question.

Landfill in New Jersey

Background of the Case
The disposal of solid and liquid wastes is a prob-
lem in urban areas. As the available sites for landfills
continue to shrink, some metropolitan areas such as
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, have had to ship their
wastes across state lines. In the early 1970s, the vol-
ume of waste being shipped into New Jersey was in-
creasing rapidly. The state legislature believed that
the treatment and disposal of wastes posed a threat
to the quality of the environment in the state.
In 1973 the New Jersey legislature passed laws
prohibiting the importation of solid or liquid waste
that originated or was collected outside the territori-
al limits of the state. Operators of private landfills
and several cities in other states with whom the 
collectors had contracts for waste disposal brought
suit, attacking the New Jersey law as unconstitu-
tional. They believed that it violated their right to
ship materials across state lines under the com-
merce clause of the Constitution. The Supreme
Court heard the case of City of Philadelphia v. 
State of New Jersey in 1978. 

The Constitutional Issue
In the United States, power is divided among
the national government, the state governments,
and the people. The Constitution gave the national
government power to regulate interstate com-
merce—trade that crosses state lines. In the New
Jersey case, the issue was whether liquid and solid
wastes could be defined as interstate commerce
according to the Constitution.
Throughout United States history the Supreme
Court has expanded the definition of interstate
commerce. One early case occurred in 1824. The
Court decided in Gibbons v. Ogden that travel by
ship on the Hudson River between New York and
New Jersey was interstate commerce. In the 
1930s the Court upheld the Wagner Act, a law 
that extended the meaning of interstate commerce
by allowing Congress to regulate business and labor
relations. The Court also applied a broad definition
of commerce to uphold the Civil Rights Act 
of 1964, considering the issue of commerce, 
specifically restaurants, along interstate highways.

Debating the Case
Debating the Case

Questions to Consider
1. What caused new legislation to be passed in
New Jersey in 1973?
2. Why do waste haulers consider their shipments
a form of commerce?
3. What national impact might a decision concern-
ing New Jersey have?

You Be the Judge
Many states are facing the same environmental
and commerce issues that faced New Jersey. What
could be a far-reaching result if the Court decided in
favor of New Jersey? In favor of the landfill owners?
In your opinion, does the commerce clause apply in
this case? Why or why not?

111

112-119 CH04S4-860053  12/1/04  1:52 AM  Page 112

S e c t i o n   4
S e c t i o n   4
Federalism and Politics
The  issue  of term  limits  for  state  and  na-
Reader’s Guide
tional representatives  is  just one example
of how federalism influences the practice
of politics and government. It affects gov-
ernment policy making, the political party system,
the political activities of citizens, and the quality of
life in the 50 states.

Key Terms
sunset law, sunshine law, bureaucracy
Find Out
■ How has federalism benefited the two-party 
system?
■ What advantages does federalism provide a 
person who may be dissatisfied with conditions
in his or her home state or area?
Understanding Concepts
Public Policy How does federalism allow for more
political participation? 

Term  L im i ts  Dead  
WASH INGTON ,  D .C . ,   F EBRUARY 1 9 9 7
A p o l i t i c a l   r e f o rm   t h a t   s t a r t e d   i n   t h e   s t a t e s   a
d e c a d e   a g o   c am e   to   a   h a l t   i n   Con g r e s s   to d ay. A
p r o p o s e d   c o n s t i t u t i o n a l   am e n dm e n t   t o   l im i t   t h e
num b e r   o f t e rm s
a   s e n a to r   o r   r e p -
r e s e n t a t i v e   co u l d
t o
f a i l e d  
s e r v e  
p a s s   t h e   H o u s e .
No t   on l y   w a s   t h e
vo t e  w e l l   s h o r t  o f
C a l l s   f o r   t e rm   l im i t s
t w o - t h i r d s
t h e  
m a j o r i t y   n e e d e d ,
b u t   t h e   p ro p o s a l   r e c e ive d   l e s s   s u p p o r t   t h an   t h e   l a s t
t im e   i t  w a s  con s i d e r e d , i n  1 9 9 5 . A l t h o u g h  m o r e  t h a n
2 0   s t a t e s   h a v e   p a s s e d   l aw s   l im i t i n g   t h e   s e r v i c e   o f
s t a t e   l e g i s l a t o r s , t h e   r e f o rm   n ow   s e em s   u n l i k e l y   t o
r e a ch   Con g r e s s . “O u r   e x i s t i n g   s y s t em   o f t e rm   l im i t s
w o r k s   s p l e n d i d l y,” c l a im e d   M i c h i g a n   D em o c r a t
Jo h n  D i n g e l l , “ i t ’s   c a l l e d   e l e c t i o n s .”

112 CHAPTER 4: THE FEDERAL SYSTEM

Federalism and Public Policy
A policy is a stated course of action. A high
school  principal  says, “It  is  our  policy  that
students  not  park  in  the  teachers’ parking  lots.” A
local store announces, “It is our policy to prosecute
all  shoplifters.” In each example, people are defin-
ing courses of action they take in response to prob-
lems that occur over and over again. Announcing a
policy means that a person or an organization has
decided  upon  a  conscious, deliberate way  of han-
dling similar issues.
The course of action a government takes in re-
sponse  to  some  issue  or  problem  is  called  public
policy. Federalism affects public policy making in
two ways. First, it affects how and where new poli-
cies  are made  in  the United  States. Second, it  in-
troduces limits on government policy making.
New  Ideas  Develop The  existence  of 50
states  and  thousands  of local  governments  en-
courages  experimenting  with  new  policies  and
ideas. Federalism permits  states  and  localities  to
serve  as proving grounds where new policies  can
be developed  and  tested. Georgia, for  example,
was  the  first  state  to  allow  18-year-olds  to  vote.
That  right has  since been  given  to  all Americans
through  the Twenty-sixth Amendment. In  1976
Colorado pioneered the use of sunset laws. Sun-
set  laws  require periodic  checks  of government
agencies to see if they are still needed. In Califor-
nia local interest groups concerned with the en-
vironment were able to get the state to start new
air-pollution  control programs. California  laws
became a model for national air-pollution laws.

112-119 CH04S4-860053  12/1/04  1:52 AM  Page 113

In  1967 Florida passed  a  sunshine law prohibiting
public officials from holding closed meetings.
Policy may also originate at the national level.
Sometimes the national government imposes new
policies  on  states  in which  local  pressure  groups
have  resisted  change. Some  of the  great  political
struggles in the nation’s history have occurred over
such  policies. In  the  late  1950s  and  early  1960s,
African  Americans  strugg led  to  w in  voting  and
other civil rights in many states. State and local of-
ficials  resisted  these  changes. Eventually, African
American leaders attracted enough national atten-
tion and support to influence the national govern-
ment  to  force  the  states  to  change  civil  rights  and
voting policies.

party  has  a  chance  to win  some  elections  some-
where  in  the  system. In  this way, federalism  helps
to  lessen  the  risk  of one  political  party  gaining  a
monopoly on political powers.
After the Civil War, for example, the Democra-
tic Party went into a long period of decline on the
national  level. Yet  the  par ty  surv ived  because 
Democratic candidates managed to maintain con-
trol of many state and local offices in the Southern
states. With  such  state  and  local  bases, the  party 
developed  new  policies  and  new  leadership with
which to challenge the majority party.
The  Democratic  Party  controlled  the  White
House for only 5 of the 12 presidential terms between
1952 and 2000. Democratic organization at the state
and  local  level, however, enabled  the party  to win a
majority in Congress during most of that period.

GOVERNMENT

Federalism and 
Political Parties
Rival  political  par ties  are  a  key  element 
Student Web Activity Visit the United States
of democratic  government. Politics  in 
Government: Democracy  in Action Web site at
the  United  States, however, is  not  a  desperate 
gov.glencoe.com and click on Chapter 4–Student
all-or-nothing  struggle  for  control of the national
Web Activities for an activity about  federalism
government, because federalism makes victories in
and politics.
state  and  local  elections  possible. Each  political
Making a Difference David Levitt was only a sixth
grader when he decided to
do something about the 30
Making a Difference
million people in the United States
who go to bed hungry every day.
David Levitt
He asked his middle school princi-
pal whether he could start a pro-
gram to distribute cafeteria left-
overs. The principal pointed out
that district health regulations 
prohibited using previously served
food. But encouraged by his 
mother, David put a plan in 
motion. First he made his 
case before the Pinellas Coun-
ty (Florida) school board. After
the board gave its approval,
he worked to satisfy state
health department 
requirements.
Since its begin-
nings in 1994, David’s

food sharing program has distrib-
uted more than a half million
pounds of food to county shelters
and food banks. 
David’s efforts to help the
people of his state did not stop
with the distribution of food. As 
a high school freshman David
worked on state legislation to
protect donors of surplus food
from liability lawsuits. Most 
importantly, David’s efforts 
have drawn attention to hunger
and the availability of food in 
his community. David Levitt re-
ceived recognition for his hard
work. When he was awarded 
a Points of Light medal in a 
White House ceremony in 1996,
David asked Mrs. Clinton what
the White House did with its 
leftovers.

Points of 
Light
medal

CHAPTER 4: THE FEDERAL SYSTEM 113

112-119 CH04S4-860053  12/1/04  1:52 AM  Page 114

A Balanced Party System

Impact of Parties Clinton
and Gore’s Democratic 
victory at the federal level
was balanced by Republican
victories at state and local
levels. How might rival 
political parties be advan-
tageous for a democracy?

Republican
Party 
symbol

Political Participation
Federalism  increases opportunities  for  citi-
zens  of the United  States  to  participate  in
politics at the national, state, and local levels. It also
increases  the  possibility  that  a  person’s  participa-
tion will  have  some  practical  effect  at  any  one  of
these levels.
Many Opportunities Because federalism pro-
vides for several levels of government, people have
easier access to political office. The road to nation-
al office often begins at the local or state level. This
aspect of federalism has tended to preserve politi-
cal organization from the bottom up.
American  federalism  gives  citizens  many
points of access to government and increases their
opportunities for influencing public policy. Noted
political  scientist  Mar tin  Grodzins  believes  the
two-party system contributes to this access:
“The lack of party discipline produces an
openness in the system that allows individ-
uals, groups, and institutions (including
state and local governments) to attempt to
influence national policy at every step of
the legislative process.”—Martin Grodzins, 1985
114 CHAPTER 4: THE FEDERAL SYSTEM

Americans vote frequently for governors, state
lawmakers, mayors, council  members, school
board members, county  prosecutors, and many
other  state  and  local  officials. They  also  vote  on
such local issues as whether to build a mass transit
system in their city, whether to outlaw smoking in
public places, or whether to increase property taxes
for schools.
Citizens may also work with interest groups to
influence national policies and state and local gov-
ernment  agencies. A  group  of concerned  neigh-
bors may petition their county zoning board to set
aside  nearby  land  for  a  public  playground. Mem-
bers  of a  local  labor  union may work  together  to
support  their  union’s  efforts  to  influence  passage
of a law in the state legislature.
Increasing Chances of Success A related
effect  of federalism  is  an  increased  chance  that
one’s political participation will have some practi-
cal impact. Most people are more likely to become
involved in political activities if they think there is
a  reasonable  chance  their  effor ts w ill  bear  fruit.
People working in the campaign of a candidate for
city  council, for  example, need  to  persuade  rela-
tively  few  voters  to  elect  their  candidate. The  in-
creased  chance  for  success  encourages  political
participation.

112-119 CH04S4-860053  12/7/04  11:07 PM  Page 115

Federalism’s Professional
Politicians

Since the 1960s more and more public poli-
cy  has  been  initiated  by  people  in  govern-
ment  service. The  great  increase  in  federal
programs  beginning  in  the mid-1930s  called  for  a
large bureaucracy, or organization of government
administrators, to  carry  out  legislation. As  these
bureaucrats  gained  expertise, they  offered  more
and  more  ideas. Political  writer  Samuel  H. Beer
describes the results:
“ In the fields of health, housing, urban re-
newal, transportation, welfare, education,
poverty, and energy, it has been . . . people
in government service . . . acting on the
basis of their specialized and technical
knowledge, who first perceived the prob-
lem, conceived the program, initially urged
it on president and Congress, went on to
help lobby it through to enactment, and
then saw to its administration. ”
—Samuel H. Beer, 1986
Various  political  analysts  have  used  the  term
technocracy to describe  this kind of decision mak-
ing which  is  based  on  the  technical  exper tise  of
professionals.
The  increase  in  federal programs  also  changed
the political relationship of state and federal officials.
As mayors  and  state officials  sought  to  take  advan-
tage of the new  federal programs, they needed  to
work more  closely with  federal officials. Organiza-
tions such as the United States Conference of Mayors
established headquarters  in Washington, D. C., to
keep up with  events  and  to  stay  in  touch with  law-
makers. In  time  these  officials  acquired  political
influence.

Differences Among 
the States
Federalism allows for real economic and polit-
ical  differences  among  the  states  because  it
permits each state considerable freedom in arranging
its own  internal affairs. As a  result, some  states do
more  than others  to  regulate business and  industry,

while some provide more health and welfare services.
Among the individual states, some have stricter crim-
inal law and some have higher taxes.
Because states can create different economic and
political environments, Americans have a wide range
of choices regarding the conditions under which they
want to live, depending upon which state they live in.
This  also  means  that  when  people  cross  a  state
boundary, they become members of a different polit-
ical system with its own officials, taxes, and laws.

The Direction of Federalism
Since the founding of the country, there has
always been a debate about what the proper
division  of powers  between  the  national  govern-
ment  and  the  states  should  be. While  the general
tendency over  the years has been  in  favor of the na-
tional government, the power balance  is  constantly
evolving in response to new issues.

Government Employees
Government Employees

Total Number in Thousands*

Tota l : 2 ,698

Tota l : 4 ,985

State
26%

Federa l
14%

Loca l
60%

Total: 11,206

* Figures do not include military personnel

Source: U.S. Bureau of the Census, 2002.

Critical Thinking
                The total number of 
 
government employees decreased by 
nearly a million people in the late 
1990s. Why would there be more local 
employees than state and federal 
employees combined?

CHAPTER 4: THE FEDERAL SYSTEM 115

112-119 CH04S4-860053  12/1/04  1:53 AM  Page 116

Accepting New Responsibilities

Federalism at Work
Despite reduced federal aid,
Cleveland’s former mayor
Michael White adopted a 
hard-driving business style 
of management to help turn
around a once-troubled city.
How are local leaders, like
Mayor White, working to 
reshape federalism?

Cleveland’s city seal

In  recent  decades, Democrats  have  generally
supported  a  nationalist  position  favoring  federal
grants that are supervised by Congress and targeted
at  specific  issues. Republicans  have  favored  a
states’ rights  view  and preferred  relying upon  the
judgment  of state  and  local  authorities. Because  of
the  relatively  even distribution of party  seats  in  re-
cent Congresses, legislation has reflected both posi-
tions. For example, Congress has given states greater
control  over  spending  for  rural  development,
allowed states to set their own highway speed limits,
and transferred responsibility for social welfare pro-
grams. At  the  same  time, Congress has  established

national food safety standards and voided state laws
limiting telecommunications competition.
Scholar Donald Kettl has pointed out  that  ideas
about federalism go in cycles:
“ Complaints about excessive federal control
tend to be followed by proposals to shift more
power to state and local governments. Then,
when problems arise in state and local ad-
ministration—and problems inevitably arise
when any organization tries to administer
anything—demands for closer federal super-
vision and tighter federal controls follow.”
—Donald F. Kettl, 1987
S e c t i o n   4   A s s e s s m e n t
S e c t i o n   4   A s s e s s m e n t

Federalism

Checking for Understanding
1. Main Idea Using a graphic organizer like the one
to the right, show two ways that federalism 
influences 
public policy 
making. 
2. Define sunset law, sunshine law, bureaucracy. 
3. Identify public policy.
4. How did African Americans use national 
attention to change policy in state and local 
governments in the 1950s and 1960s?
5. How does federalism affect the two-party system
in the United States?

116 CHAPTER 4: THE FEDERAL SYSTEM

Critical Thinking
6. Making Inferences How does federalism allow
for political and economic diversity among the
states?

Public Policy Federalism allows people to have
easier access to political office and greater 
opportunities for influencing public policy. 
Find out the political offices that a person 
living in your community can vote for on the
state and local levels. Illustrate your findings 
in a poster display.

112-119 CH04S4-860053  12/1/04  1:53 AM  Page 117

Analyzing Primary Sources
Primary sources are
Executive Branch of the Fed-
eral Government to use its
records of events made
powers and authority to up-
by the people who wit-
hold Federal Courts, the Presi-
nessed them. They include
dent’s responsibility is
letters, diaries, photographs,
inescapable. In accordance
news articles, and legal 
with that responsibility, I have
documents.
today issued an Executive
Primary sources yield
Order directing the use of
several important kinds of
troops under Federal authority
information. Often they give
to aid in the execution of
detailed accounts of events.
School integration in Little Rock
Federal law at Little Rock,
However, the account reflects
Arkansas. . . . It was my hope that this localized
only one perspective. For this reason, you must
situation would be brought under control by
examine as many perspectives as possible before
city and State authorities. If the use of local 
drawing any conclusions.
police powers had been sufficient, our traditional
method of leaving the problems in those hands
would have been pursued. But when large 
gatherings of obstructionists made it impossible
for the decrees of the Court to be carried out,
both the law and the national interest demanded
that the President take action.

Learning the Skill

1. When was this document written?
2. What event does the document address?
3. Why do you think the document was written?

Application Activity
Application Activity
Find a primary source from your past—
a photo, a report card, an old newspaper
clipping, or your first baseball card. Bring
this source to class and explain what it
shows about that time in your life.
The Glencoe Skillbuilder
Interactive Workbook, Level 2
provides  instruction and practice
in key social studies skills.

117

To analyze primary sources, follow these steps:
• Identify the author of the source.
• Identify when and where the document was
written.
• Read the document for its content and try
to answer the five “W” questions: Who is 
it about? What is it about? When did it 
happen? Where did it happen? Why did it
happen?
• Determine what kind of information may
be missing from the primary source.

Practicing the Skill

The primary source that follows is part of an
address given by President Eisenhower. Read the
source, and then answer the questions.

September 24, 1957

Whenever normal agencies prove inadequate
to the task and it becomes necessary for the 

112-119 CH04S4-860053  12/1/04  1:54 AM  Page 118

GOVERNMENT

C h a p t e r   4
C h a p t e r   4
Assessment and Activities
Recalling Facts
1. Name the clause of the Constitution that 
resolves conflicts between state law and 
national law.
2. Describe how Congress gained power to 
regulate farm production, child labor, wages
and hours, and criminal conduct.
3. What is the major source of income for the 
national government?
4. How does the federalist system affect political
participation?
5. Who pays for elections of senators, represen-
tatives, and presidential electors?

Self-Check Quiz Visit the United States Government:
Democracy  in Action Web site at gov.glencoe.com and
click on Chapter 4–Self-Check Quizzes to prepare  for
the chapter test.
Reviewing Key Terms
On a sheet of paper write the headings “National
Government” and “State Government.” Group the
terms below under the appropriate heading.
4. reserved powers
1. implied powers
2. expressed powers
5. elastic clause
3. inherent powers

Understanding Concepts
1. Federalism Why does the Tenth Amendment
use the term reserved to describe the powers
that belong to the people and the states?
2. Federalism On what historical basis do states’
rights supporters argue that the national gov-
ernment is only an agent of the states?
3. Public Policy Experts in government agencies
initiate many national laws in health, the envi-
ronment, energy, welfare, education, and busi-
ness. Why do these bureaucrats have great
influence on legislation and decision making?

Critical Thinking
1. Making Comparisons Use a graphic organizer
like the one below to compare President
Ronald Reagan’s concept of federalism with
President Franklin D. Roosevelt’s.

Concepts of Federalism
Roosevelt
Reagan

2. Identifying Assumptions “Federalism helps lessen
the risk of one political party gaining a monopoly
on political powers.” What assumption about
the value of a two-party system does this
statement make?

Federal System
• Constitution delegates certain powers to national government
• Some powers are shared by federal government and states
• All other powers are reserved to the states or the people

Developing Federalism
• States’ rights position favors the power of states over 
national government
• Nationalist position favors supremacy of national government
over states
• Size and power of national government expanded over the
years to meet the needs of a modern industrial nation
• Today states are gaining responsibility as federal government
loosens regulations
Federalism and Politics
• Federalism determines whether public policy originates at
local, state, or national  level
• Federalism  lessens the risk of one political party 
monopolizing power
• Federalism gives citizens greater opportunities to participate
in politics

112-119 CH04S4-860053  12/1/04  1:54 AM  Page 119

Analyzing Primary
Sources
In 1964 Lyndon B. Johnson de-
clared his desire to create a
Great Society that would utilize
the wealth of the nation to meet
the needs of all of its people.
Read the excerpt from his
speech, and answer the 
questions that follow.

C h a p t e r   4
C h a p t e r   4

Interpreting Political Cartoons Activity

“Look, the American people don’t want to be bossed 
around by federal bureaucrats. They want to be bossed around 
by state bureaucrats.”

1. How does this cartoon demonstrate the states’ rights position
of federalism?
2. How are the American people “bossed around” by federal
bureaucrats?
3. Is the speaker probably a state or federal official? Why?

“The Great Society rests on abundance
and liberty for all. It demands an end 
to poverty and racial injustice, to which
we are totally committed in our time.
But that is just the beginning. . . .
So I want to talk to you today about
three places where we begin to build
the Great Society—in our cities, in our
countryside, and in our classrooms. . . .
The catalog of ills is long: there is 
the decay of the centers and the 
despoiling of the suburbs. There is 
not enough housing for our people or
transportation for our traffic. Open
land is vanishing and old landmarks
are violated. . . .
But I do promise this: We are going to assemble the 
best thought and the broadest knowledge from all over 
the world to find those answers for America. I intend to 
establish working groups to prepare a series of White House
conferences and meetings—on the cities, on natural beauty,
on the quality of education, and on other emerging chal-
lenges. And from these meetings . . . we will begin to set our
course toward the Great Society.”

1. How do you think President Johnson interpreted
his executive powers based on an interpretation
of the "necessary and proper" clause? Did he
interpret this clause loosely or more strictly? 
2. Do you believe Johnson was acting within his
power to enact a program like the Great Society?
Explain.  

Applying Technolgy Skills
Using the Internet Use the Library of Con-
gress Web site to find out about several bills that

are being considered in the current congressional
term. Identify the kind of power—expressed,
implied, or inherent—that each piece of 
legislation illustrates.

Participating  in 
Local Government
Congress has the power 
to add new states to the
Union. Find out how and
when your state was first
settled, developed govern-
ment, and was admitted to the
Union. Use research materials from
your school or local library and present your 
findings in an illustrated report. Create a time 
line that includes important governmental 
developments.

CHAPTER 4: THE FEDERAL SYSTEM 119

