Federalism According to statistics,
Americans move an average of six times
during their lives, often from state to
state. What federal laws protect them
wherever they live? If you moved to a
new state, how might laws differ?

To learn more about how the
powers of the federal and

state governments affect your life, view
the Democracy in Action Chapter 4
video lesson:

The Federal System

★       ★       ★       ★       ★       ★       ★       ★       ★       ★

GOVERNMENT

Chapter Overview Visit the United States
Government: Democracy in Action Web site
at gov.glencoe.com and click on Chapter
4—Overview to preview chapter information.

94

S e c t i on   1
S e c t i on   1

National and State Powers

Reader’s Guide

Key Terms
delegated powers, expressed powers, implied
powers, elastic clause, inherent powers,
reserved powers, supremacy clause, concurrent
powers, enabling act
Find Out
■ What are the differences between the expressed

powers and the implied powers?

■ How does the overall power of the national
government compare to that of the states?

Understanding Concepts
Federalism In what ways does federalism provide
constitutional safeguards for the people?

Wallace Complies

TUSCALOOSA, ALABAMA, JUNE 1963

With  the  National

Guard  on  cam-
pus, Governor  George
Wallace reluctantly com-
plied  with  a  request  by
General Henry Graham
to  step  aside  and  let
African  American  stu-
dents  register  at  the
University  of Alabama.
Defying a federal court order, Wallace had stood in a
doorway  at  the  university, blocking  two  African
American students. “I denounce and forbid this ille-
gal and unwarranted action by the Central Govern-
ment,” Wallace  stated  as  he  refused  to  move. When
President Kennedy responded by federalizing the Al-
abama National Guard, the governor backed down.

Wallace attempts to
block desegregation

Few confrontations between the state and

national governments are as dramatic as
the one at the University of Alabama in
1963. Nevertheless, national  and  state
powers have been continually redefined through
conflict, compromise, and cooperation since the
earliest days of the republic. How do the different
levels of government cooperate?

The Division of Powers

The Constitution divided government au-
thority by giving the national government
certain specified powers, reserving all other powers
to the states or to the people. In addition, the na-
tional and state governments share some powers.
Finally, the Constitution specifically denied some
powers to each level of government.

The Constitution has preserved the basic de-
sign of federalism, or the division of government
powers, over the years. The American concept of
federalism, however, has  changed  greatly  since
1787.

Federalism  is  not  a  static  relationship  be-
tween different levels of government. It is a dy-
namic concept that affects everyday decisions at
all levels. An understanding of federalism must
begin with the Constitution.

National Powers

The Constitution grants three types of
power to the national government: ex-
pressed, implied, and inherent powers. Collec-
tively, these  powers  are  known  as  delegated
powers, powers the Constitution grants or dele-
gates to the national government.
Expressed Powers The expressed powers
are those powers directly expressed or stated
in  the  Constitution  by  the  Founders. Most
of these powers are found in the first three ar-
ticles of the Constitution. This constitutional

▲

National and state flags at Monument Valley, Utah

CHAPTER 4: THE FEDERAL SYSTEM 95

authority includes the power to levy and collect
taxes, to coin money, to make war, to raise an
army and navy, and to regulate commerce among
the  states. Expressed  powers  are  also  called
enumerated powers.
Implied Powers Those powers that the na-
tional government requires to carry out the pow-
ers that are expressly defined in the Constitution
are called implied powers. While not specifically
listed, implied powers spring from and depend
upon  the  expressed  powers. For  example, the
power to draft people into the armed forces is im-
plied  by  the  power  given  to  the  government  to
raise an army and navy.

The basis for the implied powers is the neces-
sary and proper clause (Article I, Section 8). Often
called the elastic clause because it allows the pow-
ers of Congress to stretch, it says:

Laws which shall be necessary and proper
for carrying into Execution the Foregoing
powers, and all other powers vested . . . in

“Congress shall have power . . . to make all
the Government of the United States. . . .”

—Article I, Section 8

Displaying the Flag

W hether you display the American flag every

day, or only on holidays and special occa-
sions, certain laws and customs govern

the use of this symbol of national unity.

The flag is usually flown only from dawn to

dusk. If displayed at night, it should be lighted. In
a group of flags, the U.S. flag should be at the
center and higher than the others. Fly the flag at
half-staff on the death of a government official and
until noon on Memorial Day.

Inside, the flag may hang flat against the wall

behind a speaker, with the stars on the left. If on a
staff, it should be on the viewers’ left. Any other
flags should be placed to the right. The flag may
be flown upside down only to signal distress.

Remember that, as the symbol of the United

States, the flag should be treated with respect.

96

Implied powers have helped the national gov-
ernment strengthen and expand its authority to
meet many problems the Founders did not foresee.
Thus, Congress has used the implied powers to
regulate nuclear power plants and to develop the
space program.
Inherent Powers Those powers that the na-
tional government may exercise simply because it
is a government are its inherent powers. For ex-
ample, the national government must control im-
migration and establish diplomatic relations with
other countries, even though these powers are not
spelled out in the Constitution.

The States and the Nation

Some  people  felt  that  the  Constitution
granted too much power to the national gov-
ernment. In The Federalist, No. 45, James Madison
argued  that  in  fact  it  granted  few  and  limited
powers  to  the  national  government  while  the
state’s  powers  were  many  and  broadly  drawn.
The Constitution  also  reserves  certain  powers
strictly  to  the  states. These  are  called  reserved
powers. While the Constitution does not list these

Never let it
touch the
ground. When
an American
flag becomes
too worn to dis-
play, it should
be destroyed in
a dignified way,
preferably by
burning.

Proudly displaying the flag

articipating
articipating

I N   G O V E R N M E N T
I N   G O V E R N M E N T

A C T I V I T Y
A C T I V I T Y

Flag Research What are the rules governing flying
the flag at half-staff? When was the last time a
flag flew at half-staff over your school?

Division of Federal and State Powers
Division of Federal and State Powers

NATIONAL

GOVERNMENT

(Expressed, Implied,
and Inherent Powers)

NATIONAL and STATE

GOVERNMENTS

(Concurrent

Powers)

STATE

GOVERNMENTS

(Reserved Powers)

Regulate foreign and
interstate commerce
Coin money
Provide an army
and navy
Declare war
Establish federal courts
below the Supreme Court
Conduct foreign relations
Exercise powers implied from
the expressed powers

Levy taxes

Borrow money

Spend for general
welfare

Establish courts

Enact and enforce
laws

Regulate intrastate
commerce

Establish local
government systems

Administer elections

Protect the public’s
health, welfare, and
morals



Critical Thinking
    The Constitution established a detailed plan for the distribution of power

between the federal and state governments. What powers are shared by the national and
state governments?

powers  specifically, it  grants  to  the  states  those
powers “not delegated to the United States by the
Constitution, nor prohibited by it to the states.”
Thus the states have authority over matters not
found in the Constitution, such as the regulation
of public school systems.
The  Supremacy  Clause What  happens
when states exceed their reserved powers and pass
laws that conflict with national laws? Which law is
supreme? Article VI, Section 2, of the Constitution
makes the acts and treaties of the United States
supreme. For this reason it is called the supremacy
clause. This clause states:

“This Constitution, and the Laws of

the United States which shall be made
in Pursuance thereof, and all treaties
made . . . under the Authority of the
United States, shall be the supreme
Law of the Land; and the Judges in

every State shall be bound thereby.”

—Article VI, Section 2

No state law or state constitution may conflict
with any form of national law. Article VI also re-
quires  that  all  national  and  state  officials  and
judges be bound to support the Constitution. State
officials are not permitted to use their state’s re-
served powers to interfere with the Constitution.

States create local governments such as those of
cities and counties. As such, local governments get
their powers from the states. Hence, local govern-
ments  are  also  bound  by  the  Constitution’s  su-
premacy clause—if a state is denied a certain power,
so, too, are the local governments within the state.
Concurrent Powers The federal government
and the states also have certain concurrent powers.
Concurrent powers are those powers that both the
national  government  and  the  states  have. Each
level of government exercises these powers inde-
pendently. Examples of concurrent powers are the
power to tax, to maintain courts and define crimes,
and to appropriate private property for public use.
Concurrently with the national government, the
states may exercise any power not reserved by the

CHAPTER 4: THE FEDERAL SYSTEM 97

Guarantees to the States

The Constitution obliges the national gov-
ernment to do three things for the states.
These three obligations are outlined in Article IV,

Sections 3 and 4.2

Republican Form of Government
First, the  national  government  must
guarantee each state a republican form
of government. Enforcement  of this
guarantee has become a congressional
responsibility. When Congress allows
senators  and  representatives  from  a
state to take their seats in Congress, it is
in effect ruling that the state has a re-
publican form of government.

Federal and State Cooperation

Concurrent Powers Members of both the Noble County
Sheriff’s Department and FBI agents lead convicted terrorist
Timothy McVeigh out of an Oklahoma courthouse. Why did
federal and state authorities have to cooperate after
the bombing of the federal building in Oklahoma City?

Constitution  for  the  national  government. Of
course, state actions must not conflict with any
national laws.
Denied  Powers Finally,
the  Constitution
specifically denies some powers to all levels of gov-
ernment. Article I, Section 9,1 enumerates those
things the national government cannot do. For ex-
ample, the national government cannot tax ex-
ports, and it cannot interfere with the ability of
states to carry out their responsibilities.

The next section of Article I presents a long list
of powers denied to the states. No state can make
treaties or alliances with foreign governments. Nor
can states coin money, make any laws impairing
the obligation of contracts, or grant titles of nobil-
ity. And states must have congressional permission
to collect duties on exports or imports or to make
agreements—called compacts—with other states.
Consistent with the belief in the sovereignty of
the people, the Constitution applies important lim-
itations to both the national and state governments.
These restrictions, designed to protect individual
liberties such as free speech and the rights of the ac-
cused, are set forth in Article I, Section 9, in the Bill
of Rights, and in several other amendments.

98 CHAPTER 4: THE FEDERAL SYSTEM

The  only  extensive  use  of

this
guarantee  came  just  after  the  Civil
War. At that time, some Southern states
had  refused  to  ratify  the  Civil  War
amendments  granting  citizenship
rights to African Americans. Congress
ruled that these states did not have a
republican form of government. It refused to seat
senators  and  representatives  from  those  states
until the states ratified the Civil War amendments
and  changed  their  laws  to  recognize  African
Americans’ rights.
Protection Second, the national government
must protect states from invasion and domestic vi-
olence. An attack by a foreign power on one state is
considered an attack on the United States.

Congress has given the president authority to
send federal troops to put down domestic disor-
ders when state officials ask for help. In the sum-
mer  of 1967, for  example, President  Lyndon
Johnson  sent  troops  to  Detroit  to  help  control
racial  unrest  and  rioting. Johnson  did  so  after
Michigan’s governor declared that the Detroit po-
lice and the Michigan National Guard could not
cope with the widespread violence.

When national laws are violated, federal prop-
erty is threatened, or federal responsibilities are
interfered with, the president may send troops to a

See the following footnoted materials in the Reference Handbook:
1. The Constitution, pages 774–799.
2. The Constitution, pages 774–799.

state without the request of local authorities—or
even over local objections. In 1894, for example,
President Grover Cleveland sent federal troops to
Chicago to restore order during a strike of railroad
workers even though the governor of Illinois ob-
jected. During the strike, rioters had threatened
federal property and interfered with mail delivery.
During the 1950s and 1960s, Presidents Eisen-
hower and Kennedy used this power to stop state
officials from blocking the integration of Southern
schools and universities. Eisenhower sent troops to
Little Rock, Arkansas, in 1957 when local officials
failed to integrate public schools. Kennedy used
troops at the University of Mississippi in 1962 and
the University of Alabama in 1963.

The national government has extended its de-
finition of domestic violence to include natural
disasters such as earthquakes, floods, hurricanes,
and tornadoes. When one of these disasters strikes,
the president often orders troops to aid disaster
victims. The government also provides low-cost
loans to help people repair damages.
Territorial Integrity Finally, the national gov-
ernment has the duty to respect the territorial in-
tegrity  of each  state. The  national  government
cannot use territory that is part of an existing state
to create a new state unless the national govern-
ment has permission from the legislature of the
state involved. The admission of West Virginia as a
state in 1863 may be considered an exception to
this rule.

Admission of New States

Thirty-seven states have joined the Union
since  the  original  13  formed  the  nation.
Most of these states became territories before tak-
ing steps to gain statehood. What procedures do
these territories then follow to become states?
Congress Admits New States The Consti-
tution  gives  Congress  the  power  to  admit  new
states to the Union. There are two restrictions on
this power. First, as noted earlier, no state may be
formed by taking territory from one or more states
without the consent of the states involved and of
Congress. Second, acts of admission, like all laws,
are subject to presidential veto.

The  procedure  for  admission  begins  when
Congress passes an enabling act. An enabling act,
when signed by the president, enables the people
of the territory interested in becoming a state to
prepare a constitution. Then, after the constitution
has been drafted and approved by a popular vote
in the area, it is submitted to Congress. If Congress
is still agreeable, it passes an act admitting the ter-
ritory as a state.

Since the original 13 states formed the Union,
Congress has admitted new states under a variety
of circumstances. Five states—Vermont, Kentucky,
Tennessee, Maine, and  West  Virginia—were
created  from  existing  states. Two  states, West
Virginia and Texas, were admitted under unusual
circumstances.

Federal Troops Enforce the Constitution

Federal and State Struggles
After members of the Arkansas
National Guard prevented Eliza-
beth Ann Eckford from attending
Little Rock High School on Sep-
tember 4, 1957, President
Eisenhower sent federal troops
to forcibly integrate the school.
Analyze the role of the execu-
tive branch in protecting indi-
vidual rights. What authority
did the president have to
send federal troops to Little
Rock?

Division of Powers

Federalism Guthrie
became a quiet town
after Oklahoma moved
its capital to Oklahoma
City, the state’s largest
metropolitan area. The
State Capitol has stood
in Oklahoma City since
1910. Why do state
authorities have the
power to determine

the state’s govern-

mental seat?

Oklahoma
state seal

Conditions for Admission Congress or the
president may impose certain conditions before ad-
mitting a new state, including requiring changes in
the drafted constitution submitted by a territory. In
1911 President Taft vetoed the congressional reso-
lution admitting Arizona because he objected to a
section in the Arizona constitution dealing with the
recall of judges. Arizona then modified the consti-
tution, and the next year it became the forty-eighth
state. When Alaska entered the union in 1959, it
was prohibited from ever claiming title to any lands
legally held by Native Americans or Aleuts in Alas-
ka. Ohio was admitted in 1803 on the condition
that for five years it not tax any public lands sold by
the national government within its borders.

The Supreme Court has ruled that the president
or Congress may impose conditions for admission
of a state. Once a state is admitted, however, those
conditions may be enforced only if they do not in-
terfere with the new state’s authority to manage its
own internal affairs. In the case of Arizona, once it
was admitted as a state, it promptly amended its
constitution to restore provisions about the recall of
judges that Taft had requested be deleted.

When Oklahoma was admitted in 1907, Con-
gress forbade it to move its capital from the city of
Guthrie until 1913. The Supreme Court, however,
upheld the right of Oklahoma to move the capital
to Oklahoma City in 1911. The Court declared:

West  Virginia  was  created  from  40  western
counties of Virginia that broke away when Virginia
seceded from the Union. Some people have argued
that the admission of West Virginia was a violation
of the Constitution because the Virginia legislature
did not give its consent. Congress, however, accept-
ed the decision of the minority of the Virginia legis-
lature that represented the 40 western counties. It
held that the western representatives were the only
legal acting Virginia legislature at that time.

Texas won independence from Mexico and
sought annexation to the United States for several
years before being admitted. Antislavery members
of Congress opposed creation of a new slavehold-
ing state. Texas was annexed to the United States by
a joint resolution of Congress in 1845. The joint
resolution provided for immediate statehood, al-
lowing Texas to skip the territorial period. It also
stated that Texas could be divided into as many as
five states with the approval of both Texas and the
United States.

The last two states to be admitted, Alaska and
Hawaii, shortened the admission process. They
each  adopted  a  proposed  constitution  without
waiting for an enabling act. Both were admitted in
1959.

Puerto Rico has considered statehood over a
period of several decades. Puerto Ricans, however,
rejected statehood by a vote in 1993.

100 CHAPTER 4: THE FEDERAL SYSTEM

“The power to locate its own seat of govern-

ment, and to determine when and how it
shall be changed from one place to anoth-
er, and to appropriate its own public funds
for that purpose, are essentially and pecu-
liarly state powers. . . . Has Oklahoma
been admitted upon an equal footing with
the original states? If she has . . . [Okla-
homa] may determine for her own people
the proper location of the local seat of

government.”—Justice Horace H. Lurton, 1911

Equality of the States Once admitted to the
Union, each state is equal to every other state and
has rights to control its internal affairs. No state
has more privileges or fewer obligations than any
other. Each state is also legally separate from every
other state in the Union. All states in the Union are
bound to support the Constitution.

The National Governors’
Association

The National Governors’ Association (NGA)
supports federalism by helping governors
in state policy making and in influencing national

articipating
articipating
I N   G O V E R N M E N T
I N   G O V E R N M E N T

policy. In 1908 President Theodore Roosevelt first
called the nation’s governors together to discuss
conservation. After that the governors began to
meet regularly as the Governors’ Conference to
deal with a variety of issues. In the 1960s the gov-
ernors set up a permanent organization with an
office in Washington, D.C.
NGA Helping the Governors In the 1970s
the  renamed  National  Governors’ Association
focused on helping the governors’ performance
within their own states. The NGA held seminars
and published materials on subjects such as orga-
nizing the governor’s office, dealing with the press,
and  organizing  intergovernmental  relations. A
series of publications focused on the growing in-
fluence  of states  and  governors  as  innovators.
Through the NGA, states shared ideas on how to
solve common problems.
NGA Influencing National Policy Begin-
ning in the 1980s, governors focused their atten-
tion on national policy concerns. The NGA and its
affiliates  addressed  educational, welfare, and
health-care reforms as well as the changing balance
in the federal system. Regional governors’ associa-
tions also became active in policy issues. By joining
together, the governors were becoming a big part
of the national policy-making process.

Working Within
the System

Contacting a legislator

Do we truly have government

by and for the people? If so,
how can citizens make their

opinions known? Can you work with-
in the system to change a law that
you believe is unjust?

Your opinion will carry more
influence if you join with others.
Choose an appropriate means of
expressing your views. To question
a local ordinance, attend a city
council meeting. If you object to

a state law, write to your state leg-
islator. Petitions—formal requests
for specific action signed by many
people—are also effective. You
could write letters to the editor or
prepare an editorial for a local
radio or television broadcast. The
Internet also offers an avenue
through which citizens can speak
out on an issue.
Activity

Choose an issue from an opin-

ion page of the local newspaper.
Express whether you strongly agree
or disagree in a letter to the news-
paper’s editor.

CHAPTER 4: THE FEDERAL SYSTEM 101

Obligations of the States The states per-
form  two  important  functions  for  the  national
government. First, state  and  local  governments
conduct and pay for elections of all national gov-
ernment officials—senators, representatives, and
presidential electors. The Constitution gives state
legislatures the power to fix the “times, places, and
manner” of election of senators and representa-
tives . Under the same provi-
sion, Congress  has  the  authority  to  alter  state
election laws should it so desire.

In addition, the states play a key role in the
process of amending the Constitution. According
to the document, no amendment can be added to
the Constitution unless three-fourths of the states
approve it.

The Courts as Umpire

Because federalism divides the powers of
government, conflicts frequently arise be-
tween national and state governments. By settling
such disputes, the federal court system, particular-
ly the Supreme Court, plays a key role as an umpire
for our federal system. The question of national
versus state power arose early in our nation’s his-
tory. In 1819, in the landmark case of McCulloch v.
Maryland,1 the Supreme Court ruled on a conflict
between  a  state  government  and  the  national
government. In making the decision, the Supreme
Court  held  that  in  the  instance  of a  conflict

between the national government and a state gov-
ernment, the national government is supreme.

Since  McCulloch, the  Supreme  Court  has
made many rulings on the constitutional division
of power between the national and state govern-
ments. The Court’s view of this division has shifted
through  the  years  depending  on  the  mood  of
the nation and on the number of conservative and
liberal justices on the Court. Early in its history,
the Court usually favored states’ power. During the
Depression  and  the  civil  rights  movement,
the Court  tended  to  favor  a  strong  national
government. Since the 1990s, a narrow majority
of conservative justices has again generally ruled
in favor of the states. For example, in United States
v. Lopez (1995), the Court held that Congress had
exceeded its authority over the states by passing a
law banning gun possession in or near schools.

Federal judges also serve as umpires of federal-
ism  when  they  review  the  actions  of state  and
local governments. In recent decades the power
of federal judges has increased because of modern
interpretations  of the  Fourteenth  Amendment,
which prohibits states from depriving any person
of life, liberty, or property without “due process of
law.” Broad interpretation of these words makes
nearly every action by state and local officials open
to questioning by a federal judge.

See the following footnoted materials in the Reference Handbook:
1. McCulloch v. Maryland case summary, page 761.

Section  1 Assessment
Section  1 Assessment

Checking for Understanding
1. Main Idea Using a graphic

organizer like the one at
the right, give an example
of each kind of power
granted to the national
government.

expressed

implied

inherent

2. Define delegated powers, expressed powers,

Critical Thinking
5. Making Comparisons How do the obligations
of the national government to states compare
to obligations of states to the national
government?

implied powers, elastic clause, inherent powers,
reserved powers, supremacy clause, concurrent
powers, enabling act.

3. Identify necessary and proper clause, McCulloch

v. Maryland.

4. What kinds of powers may states exercise?

Federalism New states coming into the Union
have had to follow a process established by
Congress. Beginning with the enabling act
passed by Congress, create a flow chart that
shows the dates and conditions by which your
state was admitted to the Union.

102 CHAPTER 4: THE FEDERAL SYSTEM

S e c t i on   2
S e c t i on   2

Relations Among the States
The Constitution, in establishing the feder-

Reader’s Guide

Key Terms
extradite, civil law, interstate compact
Find Out
■ What provisions in Article IV of the Constitution

attempt to provide for cooperation among the
various state governments?

■ What are some of the purposes of interstate

compacts?

Understanding Concepts
Federalism Why is it necessary that the
Constitution require states to cooperate with
one another?

Convict Goes Free

TALLAHASSEE, FLORIDA, OCTOBER 1996

since,

A64-year-old  convict,

who  escaped  from  a
Florida  prison  in  1952,
but has been a model citi-
is  officially
zen
free. When  Eddie  Brown,
of Brooklyn, New  York,
was  stopped  for  a  traffic
violation  recently, a  rou-
tine check revealed him to
be  a  long-sought  fugitive.
Originally Brown had been
serving  a  5-year  sentence
for robbery in Florida. When he was caught, Florida
officials at first wanted Brown returned to serve his
remaining  sentence. However, after  hearing  about
the  model  life  Brown  had  led  during  his  years  of
freedom, Florida governor Lawton Chiles dismissed
the order to extradite him.

No longer needed

al system, defined not only national-state
relations  but  also  relations  among  the
states. Conflicts and jealousies among the
states had been a major reason for drafting the
Constitution in 1787. One way the Constitution
dealt with this problem was to strengthen the na-
tional government. The second way was to set the
legal ground rules, such as extradition, for rela-
tions among the states. Because each state retains
much power and independence, these rules help to
assure cooperation among the states.

Interstate Relations

Article IV of the Constitution requires the
states to do the following: (1) give “full faith
and credit” to the laws, records, and court deci-
sions of other states; (2) give one another’s citizens
all the “privileges and immunities” of their own
citizens; and (3) extradite—that is, return to a
state—criminals  and  fugitives  who  flee  across
state lines to escape justice.
Full  Faith  and  Credit The  Constitution
states that “full faith and credit” shall be given in
each state to the public acts, records, and judicial
proceedings of every other state. In other words,
each state must recognize the laws and legal pro-
ceedings of the other states. For example, a car
registration of one state must be accepted by all
the other states. This clause applies only to civil
law, or laws relating to disputes between indi-
viduals, groups, or with the state. One state can-
not enforce another state’s criminal laws.

The need for this kind of rule in the federal
system is obvious. Without it, each state could
treat all other states like foreign countries. Fur-
ther, each state could become a haven for peo-
ple who decided to move to another state to
avoid their legal duties and responsibilities.

The coverage of the “full faith and credit”
rule is quite broad. Public acts refers to civil

CHAPTER 4: THE FEDERAL SYSTEM 103

Nonresidents’ Rights

Citizens in the several States.” As inter-
preted by the Supreme Court, this clause
means that one state may not discrimi-
nate unreasonably against citizens of an-
other state. It must provide citizens of
other states the same privileges and im-
munities it provides its own citizens.

The courts have never given a com-
plete listing of “privileges and immuni-
ties.” Included, however, are rights to
pass through or live in any state; use the
courts; make  contracts; buy, sell, and
hold property; and marry.

On the other hand, states may make
reasonable discrimination against non-
residents. The privileges and immuni-
ties  clause  does  not  apply  to  voting,
serving on juries, or using certain public
facilities. Some states require that a person
live in a state for a certain amount of
time before becoming a voter or public
official. States may also require individ-
uals to establish residency before they
can practice such professions as medi-
cine, dentistry, or law.

Reasonable Discrimination It is often more expensive
for residents of one state to attend an out-of-state public
college. Why do you think states charge out-of-state
students higher tuition fees?

laws passed by state legislatures. Records means
such  documents  as  mortgages, deeds,
leases,
wills, marriage licenses, car registrations, and birth
certificates. The phrase judicial proceedings refers
to various court actions such as judgments to pay
a debt.

Judicial decisions in civil matters in one state
will be honored and enforced in all states. If, for ex-
ample, a person in Texas loses a lawsuit requiring a
specific payment, and moves to Illinois to avoid
paying the money, Illinois courts will enforce the
Texas decision.
Privileges and Immunities The Founders
knew that when citizens traveled between states,
they might be discriminated against. A citizen of
Delaware, for example, might be treated as an alien
in Virginia or Maryland. Therefore, the Constitu-
tion provides that “the Citizens of each State shall
be  entitled  to  all  Privileges  and  Immunities  of

104 CHAPTER 4: THE FEDERAL SYSTEM

In  addition, nonresidents  do  not
have the same right to attend publicly
supported institutions such as schools
or to use state hospitals as do residents
of the  state. Nonresidents  may  be  re-
quired to pay higher fees for hunting or fishing
licenses than residents. State colleges and universi-
ties may, and usually do, charge higher tuition fees
to students from other states than they do to resi-
dent students.
Extradition Because states are basically inde-
pendent of one another, some means is needed to
prevent criminals from escaping justice simply by
going from one state to another. For this reason,
the Constitution provides:

“A person charged in any state with trea-

son, felony, or other crime, who shall flee
from justice, and be found in another
State, shall, on demand of the executive
authority of the State from which he fled,
be delivered up, to be removed to the State

having jurisdiction of the crime.”

—Article IV, Section 2

This  clause  provides  for  the  extradition  of
fugitives. Congress has made the governor of the
state to which fugitives have fled responsible for re-
turning them.

The Supreme Court has softened the meaning
of the extradition provision by ruling that a gover-
nor is not required to return a fugitive to another
state. Although extradition is routine in the vast
majority  of cases, occasionally  a  governor  will
refuse. For example, a Michigan governor once re-
fused to return a fugitive to Arkansas because, the
governor said, prison conditions in Arkansas were
inhumane. Arkansas  officials  could  do  nothing
about the governor’s decision. In recent years Con-
gress has acted to close the extradition loophole by
making it a federal crime to flee from one state to
another in order to avoid prosecution for a felony.
Interstate Compacts The Constitution re-
quires the states to settle their differences with one
another without the use of force. The principal
way in which states may do this is to negotiate in-
terstate  compacts. Such  compacts  are  written
agreements between two or more states. The na-
tional government or foreign countries may also
be part of an interstate compact.

Congress must approve interstate compacts.
This requirement prevents states from threatening
the Union by making alliances among themselves.
Once a compact has been signed and approved by
Congress, it is binding on all states signing it. Its
terms are enforceable by the Supreme Court.

Before 1900, only 13 interstate compacts had
received  congressional  approval. Most  of them

involved boundary disputes between states. As soci-
ety has become more complex, however, the num-
ber of compacts sent to Congress has increased.
Today nearly 200 compacts are in force.

States use compacts to deal with such matters
as  air  and  water  pollution, pest  control, toll
bridges, and transportation. New Jersey and New
York helped start this trend in 1921 when they cre-
ated the Port of New York Authority to develop
and  manage  harbor  facilities  in  the  area. Many
compacts today deal with the development and
conservation  of natural  resources. Others  deal
with the transport and disposal of hazardous waste
materials. Interstate compacts have become an im-
portant way for the states to deal with regional
problems.
Lawsuits Between States Sometimes states
are unable to resolve their disputes by these or
other methods. When this happens, an interstate
lawsuit may result. Since 1789 more than 220 dis-
putes between states have wound up in court. Suits
among two or more states are heard in the United
States Supreme Court, the only court in which one
state may sue another.

States bring one another to court for a variety
of reasons. Cases in the West often involve water
rights. Arizona, California, and  Colorado  have
gone to the Court in disputes over water from the
Colorado River. Other cases have involved sewage
from one state polluting the water in another state.
Still other cases are disputes over boundary lines.
Arkansas  and  Tennessee  had  such  a  dispute  as
recently as 1970.

Section  2 Assessment
Section  2 Assessment

Checking for Understanding
1. Main Idea In a chart, list three ways states treat

nonresidents differently and the same as residents.

Treated the same

Treated differently
1.
2.
3.

2. Define extradite, civil law, interstate compact.
3. Identify “full faith and credit,” “privileges and

immunities.”

4. What three constitutional provisions are aimed

at promoting cooperation among the states?

Critical Thinking
5. Understanding Cause and Effect What environ-

mental problems could interstate compacts
address, and what solutions could they achieve?

Federalism Imagine you have moved to a new
state. Find out if and how a driver’s license,
automobile registration, and voting registration
are changed. Write a report on your findings.

CHAPTER 4: THE FEDERAL SYSTEM 105

S e c t i on   3
S e c t i on   3

Developing Federalism

Reader’s Guide

Key Terms
states’ rights position, nationalist position,
income tax
Find Out
■ Compare the view of the federal government as

seen by a states’ rightist and a nationalist.

■ What events show that federalism has been
dynamic rather than static since the 1960s?

Understanding Concepts
Federalism How do national crises, such
as war, tend to shift power to the national
government?

Shopping the Net

WASHINGTON, D.C., MARCH 19, 1998

The  National  Governors’ Association  (NGA)
and  other  groups  representing  local  officials
have  decided  to  support  national  legislation  that
temporarily  bans  sales  taxes  on
Internet transactions. The an-
nouncement  marks  a  major
policy  change  for  the  NGA.
Earlier, the  group  had  asked
Congress  to  give  states  the
right  to  collect  sales  taxes  on
Internet  commerce  based  on
the tax rates of customers’ home states. The NGA
agreed to a three-year delay on Internet taxes after
negotiating with congressional supporters of leg-
islation banning the taxes. To gain the governors’
support, the  bill’s  authors  agreed  to  reduce  the
length of the delay from six to three years.

Internet User

106 CHAPTER 4: THE FEDERAL SYSTEM

The roles of state and national government

officials  have  been  defined  during  two
centuries of developing federalism. Early
Federalists such as John Jay and Alexan-
der Hamilton had to convince the people in the
states that the new federalism of the Constitution
was better than the old confederacy. While they
deeply believed that the United States needed a
strong central government to survive, they also
knew that many people feared the centralization of
power. The colonial experience with the power of
British  government  was  still  fresh  in  people’s
minds.

Alexander Hamilton wrote:

“The proposed Constitution, so far from

implying an abolition of the State govern-
ments, makes them constituent parts of the
national sovereignty, by allowing them a
direct representation in the Senate, and
leaves in their possession certain exclusive
and very important portions of sovereign
power. This fully corresponds . . . with the

idea of a federal government.”

—Alexander Hamilton, 1787

While Hamilton’s basic definition of federal-
ism remains true, interpretations of how federal-
ism  affects  national-state  relationships  have
changed since 1787 and will no doubt continue
to do so.

States’ Rightists
Versus Nationalists

Throughout  American  history, there
have been two quite different views of
how federalism should operate. One view—the
states’ rights position—favors state and local
action  in  dealing  with  problems. A  second
view—the  nationalist  position—favors  na-
tional action in dealing with these matters.

The  States’  Rights  Position The  states’
rights view holds that the Constitution is a com-
pact among the states. States’ rightists argue that
the states created the national government and
gave it only certain limited powers. Any doubt
about whether a power belongs to the nation-
al  government  or  is  reserved  to  the  states
should be settled in favor of the states. Because
the  national  government  is  an  agent  of the
states, all of its powers should be narrowly defined.
States’ rights supporters believe state govern-
ments are closer to the people and better reflect
their wishes than the national government. They
tend to see the government in Washington, D.C., as
heavy-handed and a threat to individual liberty.

At various points in United States history, the
Supreme  Court  has  accepted  this  view. Under
Chief Justice Roger B. Taney (1836–1864), the
Court often supported states’ rights against powers
of the national government. The same was true
from 1918 to 1936, when the Court ruled new fed-
eral laws attempting to regulate child labor, indus-
try, and agriculture in the states unconstitutional.
During these times, the Court largely ignored John
Marshall’s principle of implied powers set out in
McCulloch v. Maryland. Instead, it based its deci-
sion on the Tenth Amendment, which says powers
not delegated to the national government are re-
served to the states or the people.
The  Nationalist  Position The  nationalist
position  rejects  the  idea  of the  Constitution  as
merely a compact among the states. Nationalists
deny that the national government is an agent of
the states. They argue that it was the people, not
the states, who created both the national govern-
ment and the states. Therefore, the national gov-
ernment is not subordinate to the states.

Nationalists believe the powers expressly dele-
gated to the national government should be ex-
panded as necessary to carry out the people’s will.
They hold that the “necessary and proper” clause
of the Constitution means that Congress has the
right to adopt any means that are convenient and
useful to carry out its delegated powers. They also
claim that the reserved powers of the states should
not limit how the national government can use its
own powers.

Nationalists believe the national government
stands for all the people, while each state speaks for

The 51st State? Puerto Ricans hotly
debate their political future. Though they are
U.S. citizens and must follow U.S. laws, they
lack some rights of mainland Americans, such
as the right to vote in presidential elections. If
Puerto Rico became a state, residents would
have to pay federal income taxes, but they
would also acquire all the rights U.S. citizens
have. Those in favor of Puerto Rican
independence fear that statehood would force
them to speak English and could weaken their
heritage. Some claim that commonwealth
status gives Puerto Ricans the best of both
worlds. They are U.S. citizens
and have military protection,
but they retain their rich
Spanish culture. In the
past 30 years, public
support for statehood has
increased on the island.

only part of the people. They look to the national
government to take the lead in solving major social
and economic problems facing the nation.

The Supreme Court established the nationalist
position in 1819 in McCulloch v. Maryland, but it re-
ally  gained  ground  in  the  Court  during  the  late
1930s. At that time, the Great Depression gripped
the nation. The national government under Presi-
dent Franklin D. Roosevelt responded by starting
new social welfare and public works programs. At
first, the Court ruled these programs were unconsti-
tutional.As the Depression grew worse, however, the
Court adjusted its views. It supported the expansion
of the national government’s powers in order to deal
with the nation’s terrible economic problems.

Growing National Government
A major factor shaping the development of
American federalism has been the growth
in the size and power of the national government.

CHAPTER 4: THE FEDERAL SYSTEM 107

Over the years this expansion came largely at the
expense of the states.

A key reason for the change is that the Consti-
tution’s flexibility has allowed the Supreme Court,
Congress, and the president to stretch the govern-
ment’s powers to meet the needs of a modern in-
dustrial  nation. The  expansion  of the  national
government’s  powers  has  been  based  on  three
major constitutional provisions: (1) the war pow-
ers; (2) the power to regulate interstate commerce;
and (3) the power to tax and spend.
War  Powers The  national  government  has
power to wage war. This authority has greatly ex-
panded the federal government’s power because,
in today’s world, national defense involves more
than simply putting troops in the field. Such fac-
tors  as  the  condition  of the  economy  and  the
strength of the educational system can affect the
nation’s military capabilities.
Commerce  Power The  Constitution  gives
Congress  the  authority  to  regulate  commerce.
Supreme Court decisions have expanded this power.
The  courts  today  consistently  interpret  the
term commerce to mean nearly all activities con-
cerned with the production, buying, selling, and
transporting  of goods. For  example, Congress
passed  the  Civil Rights Act of 1964 forbidding

racial discrimination in public accommodations
such as hotels and restaurants. In upholding this
law the Supreme Court reasoned: (a) racial dis-
crimination by innkeepers and restaurant owners
makes  it  difficult  for  the  people  discriminated
against to travel and thus restricts the flow of in-
terstate commerce; (b) Congress has the power to
regulate commerce; (c) therefore, Congress may
pass laws against racial discrimination.
Taxing Power Congress has no specific consti-
tutional authority to pass laws to promote the gen-
eral welfare. Congress does, however, have authority
to raise taxes and spend money for such purposes.
The Sixteenth Amendment, ratified in 1913,
gave Congress the power to tax incomes. The in-
come tax levied on individual earnings has be-
come the major source of money for the national
government. It has given the national government
much greater financial resources than any state or
local government has.

Finally, Congress has used its taxing power to
increase the national government’s authority in
two ways. First, taxes may be used to regulate busi-
nesses. For example, Congress has put such heavy
taxes on certain dangerous products that it is not
profitable for companies to make and sell them.
Second, Congress may use taxes to influence states
to adopt certain kinds of programs. Federal law

Congressional Desegregation

Civil Rights In 1940, many
businesses discriminated
against African Americans.
Congress used its commerce
power to desegregate busi-
nesses such as this cafe in
Durham, North Carolina.

How is the com-
merce power of
Congress related
to desegregation?

Fighting
segregation

108 CHAPTER 4: THE FEDERAL SYSTEM

Number of Government Units
Number of Government Units

2002

Federal
State
Local
  Counties
  Municipalities
  Townships and towns
  School districts
  Special districts
Total Government Units

1
50

3,034
19,431
16,506
13,522
35,356
87,900

1962

1972

1982

1992

2002

Year

1952

Source: U.S. Bureau of the Census.



Critical Thinking

local governments in the United States decreased by
38,487. What type of local government is most numerous?

   From 1952 to 1972, the total number of

125

100

75

50

s
t
i
n
U

t
n
e
m
n
r
e
v
o
G

f
o

r
e
b
m
u
N

)
s
d
n
a
s
u
o
h
t

n
i
(

allows employers to deduct from
their federal taxes any state taxes
they pay to support state unem-
ployment programs. This federal
tax break helped persuade all the
states to set up their own unem-
ployment insurance programs.

Federal Aid to
the States

25

As the national government
has grown and enlarged its
powers, Congress  has  developed
two  major  ways  to  influence  the
policies of state and local govern-
ments. The  first  is  by  providing
money  through  various  federal
grants. The second is by imposing
mandates that take away, or pre-
empt, the ability of state and local
governments  to  make  their  own
policies.
Types of Federal Aid The na-
tional government has always provided different
types of aid to the states. In 1862, for instance,
Congress passed a law giving nearly 6 million acres
of public land to the states for support of colleges.
Since the 1950s, federal aid to state and local gov-
ernments has increased tremendously.

The main way the national government pro-
vides  money  to  the  states  is  through  federal
grants. These are sums of money given to state or
local governments to be spent for a variety of spe-
cific purposes. For example, federal money might
go to a city to help improve airport runways or to
a state for building new roads.

Federal grants redistribute income among the
states. Taxes are collected by the federal govern-
ment from citizens in all fifty states; this money is
then allocated through grants to people in other
states. In this way, federal grants have often worked
to help reduce inequalities between wealthy and
less wealthy states. The process of deciding how
grant money is allocated can be very political, with
states and their representatives in Congress com-
peting fiercely to get as large a share as possible.

States and local offices have learned that along
with  more  federal  aid  comes  federal  control
and red  tape. This  is  because  many  federal  aid
programs provide money only if the state and local
authorities are willing to meet conditions set by
Congress.
Preemption Laws Since the mid 1960s, Con-
gress  has  used  preemption, or  the  power  to
assume responsibility for a state government func-
tion, in order to gain authority over a state. For
example, Congress passed the Nutritional Labeling
and Education Act in 1990 to establish national
food  labeling  standards. This  law  took  away
the power  of individual  states  to  set  their  own
requirements, even  if those  requirements  were
more strict than the new national standards.

Preemption laws limit the authority of state
and  local  governments  through  restraints  and
mandates. A restraint is a requirement set by Con-
gress that prohibits a local or state government
from exercising a certain power. A  mandate is a
federal order requiring states to provide a service

CHAPTER 4: THE FEDERAL SYSTEM 109

Federal Revenue Returns
Federal Revenue Returns

to the States, 2002
to the States, 2002

$2.07

$1.61

$1.19

87¢

98¢

74¢

76¢

$1.67

$1.06

$1.31

$1.14

78¢

$1.21

$2.37

$1.91

$1.57

77¢

88¢

88¢

$1.13

66¢

$1.34

85¢

75¢

$1.08

$1.23

77¢

$1.00

$1.09

$1.03

65¢

62¢

$1.82

$150
$1.07

85¢

$1.22

$1.34

$6.44*

$1.13

$1.34

$1.52

$1.55

$1.50

$1.26

$1.89

$1.64

$1.01

92¢

$1.48

$1.01

For each dollar of federal taxes sent to Washington, D.C.:

$1.00 or more of federal spending returned
99¢ or less of federal spending returned

*District of Columbia
Source: Tax Foundation, Washington, D.C.

                            Federal revenue received from the states is
not returned equally to the states. Which state receives the
highest federal returns? The lowest?

and  alter  curbs  on  sidewalks
to better accommodate the physi-
cally challenged. Federal preemp-
tion  laws  address  issues  such  as
setting water quality and clean air
standards  and  protecting  civil
rights.

Advocates  of

states’ rights
dislike  the  use  of preemption
because these laws may prevent the
enforcement of a state or local law.
They  also  can interfere  with
the ability of local and state govern-
ments  to  set  priorities  for  them-
selves. Finally, preemption laws do
not require Congress to pay for new
mandates. Congress can therefore
establish  new  programs  and
regulations and pass the burden of
paying for them to the states.

The balance of power in the
federal  system  has  shifted  from
time  to  time. Presidents  Ronald
Reagan and George H.W. Bush put
in  place  several  policies  that
turned the responsibility for many
federal programs over to state and
local  governments. The  total
amount of federal aid given to the states declined
as well. The relationship between federal and state
governments  is  dynamic  and  is  affected  by  the
policies of the president and of Congress.

or  undertake  an  activity  in  a  manner  that  meets
minimum national standards set by Congress. The
Americans  With  Disabilities  Act, for  example,
required state and local governments to build ramps

Section  3 Assessment
Section  3 Assessment

Checking for Understanding
1. Main Idea Using a graphic organizer like the one
below, identify three constitutional provisions that
have been the basis for the tremendous growth
of the national
government.

National Government

2. Define states’ rights position, nationalist

position, income tax.

3. Identify Chief Justice Roger B. Taney, Civil

Rights Act of 1964, “New Federalism.”

4. In what two ways has Congress used its taxing

power to increase the national government’s
authority?

110 CHAPTER 4: THE FEDERAL SYSTEM

Critical Thinking
5. Making Comparisons Analyze the major differ-
ence between the states’ rights and the nation-
alist views of federalism.

Federalism Write an opinion paper stating
your position on the following question: Should
the national government distribute money to
states today with “no strings attached,” or
should the money be directed toward specific
programs? Explain your position.

CASES TO DEBATE

Philadelphia v. State
of New Jersey, 1978
Americans take for
granted the right to
unrestricted travel

from one state to another. If we make a purchase outside our home
state, we know we can transport it home without paying a duty or
fee. Are  there any limits to traffic among the states? The case of
City of Philadelphia v. State of New Jersey addressed this question.

Landfill in New Jersey

Background of the Case

The Constitutional Issue

The disposal of solid and liquid wastes is a prob-
lem in urban areas. As the available sites for landfills
continue to shrink, some metropolitan areas such as
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, have had to ship their
wastes across state lines. In the early 1970s, the vol-
ume of waste being shipped into New Jersey was in-
creasing rapidly. The state legislature believed that
the treatment and disposal of wastes posed a threat
to the quality of the environment in the state.

In 1973 the New Jersey legislature passed laws

prohibiting the importation of solid or liquid waste
that originated or was collected outside the territori-
al limits of the state. Operators of private landfills
and several cities in other states with whom the
collectors had contracts for waste disposal brought
suit, attacking the New Jersey law as unconstitu-
tional. They believed that it violated their right to
ship materials across state lines under the com-
merce clause of the Constitution. The Supreme
Court heard the case of City of Philadelphia v.
State of New Jersey in 1978.

In the United States, power is divided among
the national government, the state governments,
and the people. The Constitution gave the national
government power to regulate interstate com-
merce—trade that crosses state lines. In the New
Jersey case, the issue was whether liquid and solid
wastes could be defined as interstate commerce
according to the Constitution.

Throughout United States history the Supreme

Court has expanded the definition of interstate
commerce. One early case occurred in 1824. The
Court decided in Gibbons v. Ogden that travel by
ship on the Hudson River between New York and
New Jersey was interstate commerce. In the
1930s the Court upheld the Wagner Act, a law
that extended the meaning of interstate commerce
by allowing Congress to regulate business and labor
relations. The Court also applied a broad definition
of commerce to uphold the Civil Rights Act
of 1964, considering the issue of commerce,
specifically restaurants, along interstate highways.

Debating the Case
Debating the Case

Questions to Consider
1. What caused new legislation to be passed in

New Jersey in 1973?

2. Why do waste haulers consider their shipments

a form of commerce?

3. What national impact might a decision concern-

ing New Jersey have?

You Be the Judge

Many states are facing the same environmental
and commerce issues that faced New Jersey. What
could be a far-reaching result if the Court decided in
favor of New Jersey? In favor of the landfill owners?
In your opinion, does the commerce clause apply in
this case? Why or why not?

111

S e c t i on   4
S e c t i on   4

Federalism and Politics

Reader’s Guide

Key Terms
sunset law, sunshine law, bureaucracy
Find Out
■ How has federalism benefited the two-party 

system?

■ What advantages does federalism provide a

person who may be dissatisfied with conditions
in his or her home state or area?

Understanding Concepts
Public Policy How does federalism allow for more
political participation?

Term Limits Dead

WASHINGTON, D.C., FEBRUARY 1997

failed

Apolitical  reform  that  started  in  the  states  a
decade ago came to a halt in Congress today. A
proposed  constitutional  amendment  to  limit  the
number of terms
a  senator  or  rep-
resentative  could
to
serve
pass  the  House.
Not only was the
vote well short of
two-thirds
the
majority  needed,
but  the  proposal  received  less  support  than  the  last
time it was considered, in 1995. Although more than
20  states  have  passed  laws  limiting  the  service  of
state  legislators, the  reform  now  seems  unlikely  to
reach Congress. “Our existing system of term limits
works  splendidly,” claimed  Michigan  Democrat
John Dingell, “it’s called elections.”

Calls for term limits

112 CHAPTER 4: THE FEDERAL SYSTEM

The issue of term limits for state and na-

tional representatives is just one example
of how federalism influences the practice
of politics and government. It affects gov-
ernment policy making, the political party system,
the political activities of citizens, and the quality of
life in the 50 states.

Federalism and Public Policy

A policy is a stated course of action. A high
school principal says, “It is our policy that
students not park in the teachers’ parking lots.” A
local store announces,“It is our policy to prosecute
all shoplifters.” In each example, people are defin-
ing courses of action they take in response to prob-
lems that occur over and over again. Announcing a
policy means that a person or an organization has
decided upon a conscious, deliberate way of han-
dling similar issues.

The course of action a government takes in re-
sponse to some issue or problem is called public
policy. Federalism affects public policy making in
two ways. First, it affects how and where new poli-
cies are made in the United States. Second, it in-
troduces limits on government policy making.
New  Ideas  Develop The  existence  of 50
states and thousands of local governments en-
courages experimenting with new policies and
ideas. Federalism permits states and localities to
serve as proving grounds where new policies can
be developed and tested. Georgia, for example,
was the first state to allow 18-year-olds to vote.
That right has since been given to all Americans
through the Twenty-sixth Amendment. In 1976
Colorado pioneered the use of sunset laws. Sun-
set laws require periodic checks of government
agencies to see if they are still needed. In Califor-
nia local interest groups concerned with the en-
vironment were able to get the state to start new
air-pollution control programs. California laws
became a model for national air-pollution laws.

In 1967 Florida passed a sunshine law prohibiting
public officials from holding closed meetings.

Policy may also originate at the national level.
Sometimes the national government imposes new
policies on states in which local pressure groups
have resisted change. Some of the great political
struggles in the nation’s history have occurred over
such policies. In the late 1950s and early 1960s,
African Americans struggled to win voting and
other civil rights in many states. State and local of-
ficials resisted these changes. Eventually, African
American leaders attracted enough national atten-
tion and support to influence the national govern-
ment to force the states to change civil rights and
voting policies.

Federalism and
Political Parties

Rival  political  parties  are  a  key  element
of democratic  government. Politics  in
the  United  States, however, is  not  a  desperate
all-or-nothing struggle for control of the national
government, because federalism makes victories in
state and local elections possible. Each political

party has a chance to win some elections some-
where in the system. In this way, federalism helps
to lessen the risk of one political party gaining a
monopoly on political powers.

After the Civil War, for example, the Democra-
tic Party went into a long period of decline on the
national  level. Yet  the  party  survived  because
Democratic candidates managed to maintain con-
trol of many state and local offices in the Southern
states. With such state and local bases, the party
developed new policies and new leadership with
which to challenge the majority party.

The  Democratic  Party  controlled  the  White
House for only 5 of the 12 presidential terms between
1952 and 2000. Democratic organization at the state
and local level, however, enabled the party to win a
majority in Congress during most of that period.

GOVERNMENT

Student Web Activity Visit the United States
Government: Democracy in Action Web site at
gov.glencoe.com and click on Chapter 4–Student
Web Activities for an activity about federalism
and politics.

Making a Difference David Levitt was only a sixth

Making a Difference

David Levitt

Points of
Light
medal

grader when he decided to
do something about the 30
million people in the United States
who go to bed hungry every day.
He asked his middle school princi-
pal whether he could start a pro-
gram to distribute cafeteria left-
overs. The principal pointed out
that district health regulations
prohibited using previously served
food. But encouraged by his
mother, David put a plan in

motion. First he made his
case before the Pinellas Coun-
ty (Florida) school board. After
the board gave its approval,
he worked to satisfy state

health department

requirements.

Since its begin-

nings in 1994, David’s

food sharing program has distrib-
uted more than a half million
pounds of food to county shelters
and food banks.

David’s efforts to help the
people of his state did not stop
with the distribution of food. As
a high school freshman David
worked on state legislation to
protect donors of surplus food
from liability lawsuits. Most
importantly, David’s efforts
have drawn attention to hunger
and the availability of food in
his community. David Levitt re-
ceived recognition for his hard
work. When he was awarded
a Points of Light medal in a
White House ceremony in 1996,
David asked Mrs. Clinton what
the White House did with its
leftovers.

CHAPTER 4: THE FEDERAL SYSTEM 113

A Balanced Party System

Impact of Parties Clinton
and Gore’s Democratic
victory at the federal level
was balanced by Republican
victories at state and local
levels. How might rival
political parties be advan-
tageous for a democracy?

Republican
Party
symbol

Americans vote frequently for governors, state
lawmakers, mayors, council  members, school
board members, county prosecutors, and many
other state and local officials. They also vote on
such local issues as whether to build a mass transit
system in their city, whether to outlaw smoking in
public places, or whether to increase property taxes
for schools.

Citizens may also work with interest groups to
influence national policies and state and local gov-
ernment agencies. A group of concerned neigh-
bors may petition their county zoning board to set
aside nearby land for a public playground. Mem-
bers of a local labor union may work together to
support their union’s efforts to influence passage
of a law in the state legislature.
Increasing Chances of Success A related
effect  of federalism  is  an  increased  chance  that
one’s political participation will have some practi-
cal impact. Most people are more likely to become
involved in political activities if they think there is
a reasonable chance their efforts will bear fruit.
People working in the campaign of a candidate for
city council, for example, need to persuade rela-
tively few voters to elect their candidate. The in-
creased  chance  for  success  encourages  political
participation.

Political Participation

Federalism increases opportunities for citi-
zens of the United States to participate in
politics at the national, state, and local levels. It also
increases the possibility that a person’s participa-
tion will have some practical effect at any one of
these levels.
Many Opportunities Because federalism pro-
vides for several levels of government, people have
easier access to political office. The road to nation-
al office often begins at the local or state level. This
aspect of federalism has tended to preserve politi-
cal organization from the bottom up.

American  federalism  gives  citizens  many
points of access to government and increases their
opportunities for influencing public policy. Noted
political  scientist  Martin  Grodzins  believes  the
two-party system contributes to this access:

“The lack of party discipline produces an

openness in the system that allows individ-
uals, groups, and institutions (including
state and local governments) to attempt to
influence national policy at every step of

the legislative process.”—Martin Grodzins, 1985

114 CHAPTER 4: THE FEDERAL SYSTEM

Federalism’s Professional
Politicians

Since the 1960s more and more public poli-
cy has been initiated by people in govern-
ment  service. The  great  increase  in  federal
programs beginning in the mid-1930s called for a
large bureaucracy, or organization of government
administrators, to carry out legislation. As these
bureaucrats gained expertise, they offered more
and more ideas. Political writer Samuel H. Beer
describes the results:

“In the fields of health, housing, urban re-

newal, transportation, welfare, education,
poverty, and energy, it has been . . . people
in government service . . . acting on the
basis of their specialized and technical
knowledge, who first perceived the prob-
lem, conceived the program, initially urged
it on president and Congress, went on to
help lobby it through to enactment, and

then saw to its administration.”

—Samuel H. Beer, 1986

Various political analysts have used the term
technocracy to describe this kind of decision mak-
ing which is based on the technical expertise of
professionals.

The increase in federal programs also changed
the political relationship of state and federal officials.
As mayors and state officials sought to take advan-
tage of the new federal programs, they needed to
work more closely with federal officials. Organiza-
tions such as the United States Conference of Mayors
established headquarters in Washington, D. C., to
keep up with events and to stay in touch with law-
makers. In  time  these  officials  acquired  political
influence.

Differences Among
the States

Federalism allows for real economic and polit-
ical differences among the states because it
permits each state considerable freedom in arranging
its own internal affairs. As a result, some states do
more than others to regulate business and industry,

while some provide more health and welfare services.
Among the individual states, some have stricter crim-
inal law and some have higher taxes.

Because states can create different economic and
political environments, Americans have a wide range
of choices regarding the conditions under which they
want to live, depending upon which state they live in.
This  also  means  that  when  people  cross  a  state
boundary, they become members of a different polit-
ical system with its own officials, taxes, and laws.

The Direction of Federalism

Since the founding of the country, there has
always been a debate about what the proper
division of powers between the national govern-
ment and the states should be. While the general
tendency over the years has been in favor of the na-
tional government, the power balance is constantly
evolving in response to new issues.

Government Employees
Government Employees

Total Number in Thousands*

Total: 2,698

Total: 4,985

State
26%

Federal
14%

Local
60%

Total: 11,206

* Figures do not include military personnel

Source: U.S. Bureau of the Census, 2002.

Critical Thinking
                The total number of

government employees decreased by
nearly a million people in the late
1990s. Why would there be more local
employees than state and federal
employees combined?

CHAPTER 4: THE FEDERAL SYSTEM 115

Accepting New Responsibilities

Federalism at Work
Despite reduced federal aid,
Cleveland’s former mayor
Michael White adopted a
hard-driving business style
of management to help turn
around a once-troubled city.
How are local leaders, like
Mayor White, working to
reshape federalism?

Cleveland’s city seal

national food safety standards and voided state laws
limiting telecommunications competition.

Scholar Donald Kettl has pointed out that ideas

about federalism go in cycles:

“Complaints about excessive federal control

tend to be followed by proposals to shift more
power to state and local governments. Then,
when problems arise in state and local ad-
ministration—and problems inevitably arise
when any organization tries to administer
anything—demands for closer federal super-

vision and tighter federal controls follow.”

—Donald F. Kettl, 1987

In recent decades, Democrats have generally
supported a nationalist position favoring federal
grants that are supervised by Congress and targeted
at  specific  issues. Republicans  have  favored  a
states’ rights view and preferred relying upon the
judgment of state and local authorities. Because of
the relatively even distribution of party seats in re-
cent Congresses, legislation has reflected both posi-
tions. For example, Congress has given states greater
control  over  spending  for  rural  development,
allowed states to set their own highway speed limits,
and transferred responsibility for social welfare pro-
grams. At the same time, Congress has established

Section  4 Assessment
Section  4 Assessment

Checking for Understanding
1. Main Idea Using a graphic organizer like the one

to the right, show two ways that federalism
influences
public policy
making.

Federalism

2. Define sunset law, sunshine law, bureaucracy.
3. Identify public policy.
4. How did African Americans use national

attention to change policy in state and local
governments in the 1950s and 1960s?

5. How does federalism affect the two-party system

in the United States?

116 CHAPTER 4: THE FEDERAL SYSTEM

Critical Thinking
6. Making Inferences How does federalism allow
for political and economic diversity among the
states?

Public Policy Federalism allows people to have
easier access to political office and greater
opportunities for influencing public policy.
Find out the political offices that a person
living in your community can vote for on the
state and local levels. Illustrate your findings
in a poster display.

Analyzing Primary Sources

Primary sources are

records of events made
by the people who wit-

nessed them. They include
letters, diaries, photographs,
news articles, and legal
documents.

Primary sources yield
several important kinds of
information. Often they give
detailed accounts of events.
However, the account reflects
only one perspective. For this reason, you must
examine as many perspectives as possible before
drawing any conclusions.

School integration in Little Rock

Executive Branch of the Fed-
eral Government to use its
powers and authority to up-
hold Federal Courts, the Presi-
dent’s responsibility is
inescapable. In accordance
with that responsibility, I have
today issued an Executive
Order directing the use of
troops under Federal authority
to aid in the execution of
Federal law at Little Rock,

Arkansas. . . . It was my hope that this localized
situation would be brought under control by
city and State authorities. If the use of local
police powers had been sufficient, our traditional
method of leaving the problems in those hands
would have been pursued. But when large
gatherings of obstructionists made it impossible
for the decrees of the Court to be carried out,
both the law and the national interest demanded
that the President take action.

1. When was this document written?
2. What event does the document address?
3. Why do you think the document was written?

Application Activity
Application Activity

Find a primary source from your past—

a photo, a report card, an old newspaper
clipping, or your first baseball card. Bring
this source to class and explain what it
shows about that time in your life.

The Glencoe Skillbuilder
Interactive Workbook, Level 2
provides instruction and practice
in key social studies skills.

117

Learning the Skill

written.

To analyze primary sources, follow these steps:
• Identify the author of the source.
• Identify when and where the document was
• Read the document for its content and try
to answer the five “W” questions: Who is
it about? What is it about? When did it
happen? Where did it happen? Why did it
happen?

• Determine what kind of information may

be missing from the primary source.

Practicing the Skill

The primary source that follows is part of an
address given by President Eisenhower. Read the
source, and then answer the questions.

September 24, 1957

Whenever normal agencies prove inadequate
to the task and it becomes necessary for the

Chapter  4
Chapter  4

Assessment and Activities

GOVERNMENT

Self-Check Quiz Visit the United States Government:
Democracy in Action Web site at gov.glencoe.com and
click on Chapter 4–Self-Check Quizzes to prepare for
the chapter test.
Reviewing Key Terms
On a sheet of paper write the headings “National
Government” and “State Government.” Group the
terms below under the appropriate heading.

1. implied powers
2. expressed powers
3. inherent powers

4. reserved powers
5. elastic clause

Federal System

• Constitution delegates certain powers to national government
• Some powers are shared by federal government and states
• All other powers are reserved to the states or the people

Developing Federalism

• States’ rights position favors the power of states over

national government

• Nationalist position favors supremacy of national government

over states

• Size and power of national government expanded over the

years to meet the needs of a modern industrial nation

• Today states are gaining responsibility as federal government

loosens regulations

Federalism and Politics

• Federalism determines whether public policy originates at

local, state, or national level

• Federalism lessens the risk of one political party

monopolizing power

• Federalism gives citizens greater opportunities to participate

in politics

Recalling Facts
1. Name the clause of the Constitution that
resolves conflicts between state law and
national law.

2. Describe how Congress gained power to

regulate farm production, child labor, wages
and hours, and criminal conduct.

3. What is the major source of income for the

national government?

4. How does the federalist system affect political

participation?

5. Who pays for elections of senators, represen-

tatives, and presidential electors?

Understanding Concepts
1. Federalism Why does the Tenth Amendment

use the term reserved to describe the powers
that belong to the people and the states?

2. Federalism On what historical basis do states’
rights supporters argue that the national gov-
ernment is only an agent of the states?

3. Public Policy Experts in government agencies
initiate many national laws in health, the envi-
ronment, energy, welfare, education, and busi-
ness. Why do these bureaucrats have great
influence on legislation and decision making?

Critical Thinking
1. Making Comparisons Use a graphic organizer

like the one below to compare President
Ronald Reagan’s concept of federalism with
President Franklin D. Roosevelt’s.

Concepts of Federalism

Roosevelt

Reagan

2. Identifying Assumptions “Federalism helps lessen
the risk of one political party gaining a monopoly
on political powers.” What assumption about
the value of a two-party system does this
statement make?

Chapter  4
Chapter  4

Interpreting Political Cartoons Activity

Analyzing Primary
Sources
In 1964 Lyndon B. Johnson de-
clared his desire to create a
Great Society that would utilize
the wealth of the nation to meet
the needs of all of its people.
Read the excerpt from his
speech, and answer the
questions that follow.

“Look, the American people don’t want to be bossed

around by federal bureaucrats. They want to be bossed around

by state bureaucrats.”

1. How does this cartoon demonstrate the states’ rights position

“The Great Society rests on abundance
and liberty for all. It demands an end
to poverty and racial injustice, to which
we are totally committed in our time.
But that is just the beginning. . . .
So I want to talk to you today about
three places where we begin to build
the Great Society—in our cities, in our
countryside, and in our classrooms. . . .
The catalog of ills is long: there is
the decay of the centers and the
despoiling of the suburbs. There is
not enough housing for our people or
transportation for our traffic. Open
land is vanishing and old landmarks
are violated. . . .
But I do promise this: We are going to assemble the
best thought and the broadest knowledge from all over
the world to find those answers for America. I intend to
establish working groups to prepare a series of White House
conferences and meetings—on the cities, on natural beauty,
on the quality of education, and on other emerging chal-
lenges. And from these meetings . . . we will begin to set our
course toward the Great Society.”

1. How do you think President Johnson interpreted
his executive powers based on an interpretation
of the "necessary and proper" clause? Did he
interpret this clause loosely or more strictly?
2. Do you believe Johnson was acting within his

power to enact a program like the Great Society?
Explain.

Applying Technolgy Skills
Using the Internet Use the Library of Con-
gress Web site to find out about several bills that

of federalism?

bureaucrats?

2. How are the American people “bossed around” by federal

3. Is the speaker probably a state or federal official? Why?

are being considered in the current congressional
term. Identify the kind of power—expressed,
implied, or inherent—that each piece of
legislation illustrates.

Participating in
Local Government
Congress has the power
to add new states to the
Union. Find out how and
when your state was first
settled, developed govern-
ment, and was admitted to the
Union. Use research materials from
your school or local library and present your
findings in an illustrated report. Create a time
line that includes important governmental
developments.

CHAPTER 4: THE FEDERAL SYSTEM 119


