120-131 CH05S1-860053  12/1/04  2:27 AM  Page 120

articipating
articipating
I N   G O V E R N M E N T
I N   G O V E R N M E N T
Congressional Voting How well does
your member of Congress represent 
your interests when he or she votes on
bills? Track your representative’s vote 
on important bills during this session 
of Congress. Post the voting record 
on a class bulletin board. Write 
or E-mail your representative 
regarding how well his or 
her votes matched your 
class’s positions.

120

120-131 CH05S1-860053  12/1/04  2:28 AM  Page 121

The Capitol
Take a virtual tour of the Capitol Building in Washing-
ton, D.C., and discover first-hand how the legislative
branch works. 

Glencoe’s Democracy in Action 
Video Program
The United States 
Capitol is a symbol of 
American government. The
Democracy in Action video
program “The Capitol” 
shows how the Capitol has
been the center of decision
making throughout America’s
past and continues to be 
the focus of the nation’s at-
tention. 
As you view the video
program, try to identify
several of the functions
that the Capitol serves.

Hands-On Activity
Use library or Internet resources to find
information about your state capitol, where your
state legislature meets. Create an information
pamphlet about your state capitol. Incorporate
information about historic events, present-day
uses, architectural influences, art objects or symbols in 
the building. Use a word processor to design and compose 
your pamphlet. 

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

▲ The statue Freedom,
cast in bronze with
the help of enslaved
laborers, stands on
top of the dome of
the United States
Capitol. 

120-131 CH05S1-860053  12/1/04  2:28 AM  Page 122

Your Congress Beginning in 
January each year, 535 members of
Congress come together to determine
such things as the safety of your work-
place, the amount of taxes you pay,
and how medical care will be provided. 

To learn more about how
Congress works and how 
it impacts you, view the Democracy in
Action Chapter 5 video lesson:
The Organization of Congress

★       ★       ★       ★       ★       ★       ★       ★       ★       ★

GOVERNMENT

Chapter Overview Visit the United States
Government: Democracy  in Action Web site
at gov.glencoe.com and click on Chapter
5—Overview to preview chapter  information.

122

120-131 CH05S1-860053  12/1/04  2:29 AM  Page 123

S e c t i o n   1
S e c t i o n   1
Congressional Membership
The  Founders  did  not  intend  to  make 
Reader’s Guide
Congress a privileged group, but they did 
intend  that  the  legislative  branch  have
more  power  than  any  other  branch 
of government. The Constitution  emphasized  the
importance of the  lawmaking branch by describing
Congress  in Article  I. As  James Madison  said, Con-
gress is “the First Branch of this Government.”
The  United  States  Congress  is  a  bicameral
legislature, meaning  that  it  is  made  up  of two
houses, in  this  case, the  Senate  and  the  House
of Representatives. Most  of the  delegates  to  the
Constitutional Convention  agreed  to  a  bicameral
legislature. Eighteenth-century  colonial  legisla-
tures had followed the English Parliament with its
upper house and a lower house.
Today Congress plays a central role in formu-
lating national policies. Congress initiates and ap-
proves  laws  dealing with  everything  from  health
care to tax changes.

Key Terms
bicameral legislature, session, census, 
reapportionment, redistrict, gerrymander, at-large,
censure, incumbent
Find Out
■ How does apportionment of membership  in  the
House of Representatives  in districts provide
representation  to  local voters?
■ What are  the key common characteristics of
members of Congress? 
Understanding Concepts
Political Processes How well do you think 
members of Congress represent the people who
have delegated legal authority to them?

Cong ress  Votes  Out  Perks
WA SH INGTON ,  D .C . ,   1 9 9 6    
R a n k   h a d   i t s   p r i v i -
l e g e , u n t i l   C o n -
g r e s s   h e a rd   r um b l i n g s
f rom   t h e   p e o p l e . P r e s -
s u r e d   b y   co n s t i t u e n t s ,
s e n a t o r s   d e c i d e d   t o
h an d  ove r   a   f ew  p e r k s .
T h e y   v o t e d   o u t   f r e e
F r e e   p a r k i n g   a t  
l u n c h e s , a s   w e l l   a s
N a t i o n a l   A i r p o r t
c o s t l y   g i f t s   a n d   e x -
p e n s e - p a i d   j u n k e t s   t o
f a n c y   r e s o r t s . Wa s   t h e   vo t e   a b o u t   p o l i t i c s   o r   r e a l   r e -
f o rm ?   W i s c o n s i n   D em o c r a t   Ru s s e l l   F e i n g o l d   s a i d ,
“We   i n   t h e   S e n a t e   h ave   to   s h ow   t h a t  w e   a r e   n o t   f u n -
d am e n t a l l y   d i f f e r e n t   f rom   o t h e r   p e o p l e .” T h e   s e n a -
t o r s   r e f u s e d   t o   s u r r e n d e r   t h e i r   f r e e   p a r k i n g   a t   t h e
Na t i on a l  A i r p o r t , h ow e ve r.

Congressional Sessions
Each term of Congress starts on January 3
of odd-numbered  years  and  lasts  for  two
years. For example, the 107th Congress began its
term  in  January  2001  and  the  108th  Congress
began in January 2003.
Each  term  of Congress  is  divided  into  two
sessions, or meetings. A  session  lasts  one  year
and  includes  breaks  for  holidays  and  vacations.
Until  the Twentieth Amendment was  ratified  in
1933, Congressional  sessions  did  not  formally
end until March, which left a four-month period
between the election and the formal start of new
members. This  time  delay was  shortened when
the session start date was moved to January.
Congress remains in session until its mem-
bers vote to adjourn. Neither the House nor the
Senate may  adjourn  for more  than  three  days
without the approval of the other house. Also,
if Congress  is  adjourned, the  president may
call it back for a special session if necessary.

▲

The United States Capitol

CHAPTER 5: THE ORGANIZATION OF CONGRESS 123

120-131 CH05S1-860053  12/1/04  2:30 AM  Page 124

Division of the House

▲

Past During sessions of the British
House of Commons, “the Govern-
ment,” (shown here) led by Prime
Minister William Pitt in the 1790s,
sits on one side while the “opposi-
tion” sits on the other side. The
speaker sits in the center, between
the two parties.

Present British procedures influ-
enced the U.S. House of Representa-
tives. Each major political party sits
on one side of the chamber, while
the Speaker occupies a platform in
the front and center.
▲

Political Processes
How does the physical
division into political
groups help the Speak-
er of the House to mod-
erate debates?

Membership of the House 
With its 435 members, the House of Repre-
sentatives  is  the  larger  body  of Congress.
The Constitution does not set the number of rep-
resentatives  in  the House. It  simply  states  that  the
number  of House  seats must  be  apportioned, or
divided, among  the  states  on  the  basis  of popula-
tion. Each state is entitled to at least one seat in the
House, no matter how small its population.
Qualifications The Constitution sets the qual-
ifications for election to the House of Representa-
tives. Representatives must be at least 25 years old,
be citizens of the United States for at least 7 years,
and be legal residents of the state that elects them.
Traditionally, representatives  also  live  in  the  dis-
trict they represent.
Term of Office Members of the House of Rep-
resentatives are elected for two-year terms. Elections
are held in November of even-numbered years—for
example, 1996, 1998, and  2000. Representatives
begin their term of office on January 3 following the

124 CHAPTER 5: THE ORGANIZATION OF CONGRESS

November  election. This  means  that  every  two
years, all  435 members  of the House must  run  for
reelection. It also means that the House reorganizes
itself every two years. Because more than 90 percent
of all representatives are reelected, however, there is
great  continuity  in  the House. If a  representative
dies  or  resigns  in  the  first  session  of Congress, the
state must hold a special election to fill that vacancy.
Procedures for vacancies that occur during the sec-
ond session vary from state to state.
Representation  and  Reapportionment
In  order  to  assign  representation  according  to
population, the Census Bureau takes  a  national
census, or  population  count, every  10  years.
The first  census was  taken  in 1790, and  each  state
was appor tioned  its  representatives. The  next
census  w ill  be  in  2010. The  population  of each
state determines the new number of representatives
to which  each  is  entitled—a  process  called  reap-
portionment. States with  slow population  growth
or  a  population  decrease may  lose  representatives,
while  states with more  rapid  population  growth
may gain representativees.

120-131 CH05S1-860053  12/1/04  2:30 AM  Page 125

Originally  the House  had  only  64 members.
Over  the  years, as  the  population  of the  nation
grew, the  number  of representatives  increased.
After the 1810 census the House had 186 members.
By  1911  the House  had  435 members. After  the 
debate  sparked  by   the  1920  census, and  concern
about  the  increasing  size  of the House, Congress
passed  the Reapportionment Act of 1929  limiting
the House to 435 representatives. Now each census
determines  how  those  435  seats  w ill  be  div ided
among the 50 states.
Congressional  Redistricting After  the
states  find out  their  reapportioned  representation
for the next 10-year period, each state legislature sets
up  congressional districts—one  for  each  represen-
tative. Representatives  are  elected  from  these 

congressional districts. If a state is entitled to only
one  representative, it  has  one  congressional  dis-
trict. In most  states  the  state  legislature  draws  the
boundary lines for each congressional election dis-
trict. The  process  of setting  up  new  district  lines
after  reappor tionment  has  been  completed  is
called redistricting.
Over  the  years  some  state  legislatures  abused
the  redistricting power. They did  so  in  two ways—
by  creating  congressional districts  of very unequal
populations  and  by  gerrymandering. During  the
early  1960s, for  example, there were  some  states  in
which  the  largest district  in  the  state had  twice  the
population of the  smallest district. In  these  states a
person’s  vote  in  the  largest  congressional districts
had  only  half the  value  of a  person’s  vote  in  the
smallest districts.

Congressional Apportionment, 2000
Congressional Apportionment, 2000

WA
9

OR
5

ID
2

MT
1

WY
1

NV
3/+1

CA
53/+1

UT
3

CO
7/+1

AZ
8/+2

NM
3

AK
1

HI
2

ND
1

SD
1

NE
3

KS
4

OK
5/–1

TX
32/+2

MN
8

IA
5

MO
9

AR
4

LA
7

ME
2

VT
1 NH
2

NY
29/–2

MA
10
RI
2
CT
5/–1

NJ
13
DE
1

MD
8

WI
8/–1

MI
15/–1

IL
19/–1

IN
9/–1

OH
18/–1

KY
6

TN  9

MS
4/–2

AL
7

GA
13/+2

WV
3

PA
19/–2

VA
11
NC
13/+1
SC
6

FL
25/+2

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, 2001

States gaining seats
States losing seats
     Indicates number of House seats
23/+4
               +/– Denotes gain or loss of seats

States with no change

Critical Thinking
 
 
    This apportionment map is based on the 2000 census. It will be adjusted after 
the census of 2010. What is the general trend in reapportionment because of population shifts?

CHAPTER 5: THE ORGANIZATION OF CONGRESS 125

120-131 CH05S1-860053  12/1/04  2:30 AM  Page 126

 North Carolina Congressional Districts, 2002
 North Carolina Congressional Districts, 2002

11

10

13

4444

5

9

2121212212121212221122222222222222222222

6

8

The 1st and 12th districts have 
been redrawn several times 
because of legal challenges that 
these districts artificially increase
African American representation.

1

333333

2

7

Source: Nor th Carolina General Assembly Web site, www.ncleg.net
:
g

Critical Thinking
 
 
   What governing body has the final authority to determine whether legislative 
districts are constitutional?

Redistricting  Cases In  a  series  of decisions
during  the  1960s, the  Supreme Court  addressed
reapportionment issues in Tennessee, Georgia, and
Alabama. In a case originating in Tennessee, Baker
v. Carr 1 (1962), the Court held that federal courts
could  decide  conflicts  over  draw ing  district
boundaries. Two  years  later, in Reynolds v. Sims 2,
the Court held  that  the  equal protection  clause of
the Fourteenth Amendment required that seats  in
both houses of the Alabama state legislature be ap-
por tioned  on  a  population  basis. In  Wesberry v.
Sanders 3 (Georgia, 1964), the Court ruled that the
Constitution  clearly  intended  that  a  vote   in  one
congressional district was to be worth as much as a
vote in another district. This principle has come to
be known as the “one-person, one-vote” rule. As a
result, today  each  congressional  district  contains
about 650,000 people.

See the following footnoted materials in the Reference Handbook:
1. Baker v. Carr  case summary, page 754. 
2. Reynolds v. Sims  case summary, page 764. 
3. Wesberry v. Sanders  case summary, page 767. 

126 CHAPTER 5: THE ORGANIZATION OF CONGRESS

Following the census of 1990, several states drew
new district  lines to  increase the power of ethnic or
racial minorities. This approach increased the num-
ber of minority representatives, but it also tended to
concentrate  the  Democratic  vote, leaving  neigh-
boring districts more Republican.
The Supreme Court  ruled  that North Carolina’s
1992 redistricting map was unconstitutional because
it used  race as  the “predominant  factor” in drawing
districts. North Carolina redrew its legislative districts
in 1997. These were  challenged  in  court on  similar
grounds, but in 2000 and 2001, the Supreme Court up-
held  the new redistricting plan. Because  there are no
clear guidelines for the states on this issue, the Court
has ruled on a case-by-case basis.
Gerrymandering Historically, state  legisla-
tures  have  abused  their  power  to   div ide  the 
state  into  congressional districts by  gerrymander-
ing . Gerr ymander ing means  that  the  political
par ty  controlling  the  state  government  draws  a 
district’s  boundaries  to   gain  an  advantage  in 
elections. Gerrymandering often results in district
boundaries  that  have   very  irregular  shapes.
The  term   gerrymander ing can  be  traced  to  

120-131 CH05S1-860053  12/1/04  2:30 AM  Page 127

Elbridge Gerry, an  early Democratic-Republican
governor of Massachusetts. Gerry had signed a re-
districting  plan  that  gave  his  party  a  big  political
advantage  over  the  Federalists. To   a map  of one
par ticularly  irregular  district  that  looked  like  a
salamander, ar tist  Gilber t  Stuar t  added  a  head,
w ings, and  claws. A  newspaper  editor  published
the map as a cartoon and  labeled  it a “Gerryman-
der.” Federalists popularized the term.
“Packing” and “cracking” are  ways  to   gerry-
mander. Packing a district means drawing the lines
so  they  include  as many  of the  opposing  party’s
voters  as possible. Crowding  the  opposition’s  vot-

ers  into one district makes  the remaining districts
safe  for  the majority  party’s  candidates. Cracking
means  div iding  an  opponent’s   voters  into  other
districts, to weaken the opponent’s voter base.
The  Supreme Court  has  ruled  that  congres-
sional  districts must  be  compact  and  contiguous,
or physically adjoining. This requirement, plus the
one-person, one-vote  ruling , has  cut  down   on
some  of the worst  examples  of gerrymandering.
Nevertheless, the  competitive  struggle of the  two-
party system continues  to  fuel  the practice of ger-
rymandering. Many districts  today are  still drawn
in irregular shapes for political reasons.

Swings in Control of Congress*
Swings in Control of Congress*

Political Division of 
the Senate to 1967
37
59

75

17

4

45

68

51

32

Political Division of 
the Senate Since 1987
45
55

55

56

57

48

45

45

50

48

45

44

43

52

55

55

49

1

51

1

55 1

Political Division of the House to 1967
132

188

333

295

300

1

89 13

246 1

140

1921–23

1937–39

1947–49

1965–67

Republicans led Congress in the 1920s until the Great Depression. Except 
for the late 1940s, Democrats then controlled Congress until the late 1980s.

Political Division of the House Since 1987
258

260

267

258

203

207

211

212

205

177

175

167 1

176 1

231 1

227 1

223 1

221 2

229

1

1987–89

1989–91

1991–93

1993–95

1995-97

1997–99

1999–01

2001–03

2003–05

2005–07
232
202
1
44
* These results are the results on Election Day, except for the 2001–03 Senate, in which party control changed soon after the election. 
   Divisions of seats within a Congress can change after an election due to death, retirement, and party switching.

Sources: www.senate.gov; www.house.gov.

Democrats

Republicans

Independents

Critical Thinking
 
 
    Democrats and Republicans have each had periods of dominance in the House 
and Senate. When was the most lopsided division? Why?

CHAPTER 5: THE ORGANIZATION OF CONGRESS 127

120-131 CH05S1-860053  12/1/04  2:30 AM  Page 128

Membership of the Senate
According  to  the Constitution, the  Senate
“shall  be  composed  of two  senators  from
each state.” Thus, each state is represented equally.
Today’s  Senate  includes  100  members—2  from
each of the 50 states.
Qualifications The Constitution provides that
senators must  be  at  least  30  years  old, citizens  of
the United  States  for  9  years  before  election, and
legal residents of the state they represent. All voters
of each state elect senators at-large, or statewide.
Term  of  Office Elections  for  the  Senate, like
those for the House, are held in November of even-
numbered  years. Senators  also  begin  their  terms
on  January  3, after  the  election  held  the  previous
November.
The Constitution  provided  for  continuity  in
the Senate by giving  senators 6-year  terms  and by
prov iding  that  only  one-third  of the  senators
would run for reelection every 2 years. In fact, the
Senate  has  more   continuity  than  the  Framers
planned because most senators win reelection.
If a  senator  dies  or  resigns  before   the  end  of
the  term, the  state  legislature may  authorize   the
governor  to  appoint  someone  to  fill  the  vacancy
until the next election. The governor may also call
a special election to fill the seat.
Salary and Benefits The Senate and the House
set their own salaries. In 1789 salaries for both hous-
es were  $6 per day. Low pay  in  the  early  years de-
terred  some  people  from  running  for  Congress.
Congress has  voted  itself periodic  salary  increases.
In 1991 it voted for a pay hike of $23,000, explaining
that the increase would be accompanied by a prohi-
bition on honoraria—money paid for speeches.
Meanwhile, a  constitutional  amendment  af-
fecting  legislative  salaries was  being  considered.
Originally  proposed  by   James Madison  in  1789,
the Twenty-seventh Amendment 1 was finally rat-
ified by the required 38 states when Michigan cast
the deciding vote on May 7, 1992. The amendment
prohibits a sitting Congress from giving itself a pay
raise. Any  new  congressional  salary  increase will
take effect after an intervening election.
Almost  immediately  a  group  of plaintiffs, in-
cluding some legislators, used the new amendment

128 CHAPTER 5: THE ORGANIZATION OF CONGRESS

to  challenge  a  cost-of-living  adjustment  to   raise
salaries  to  $133,600  in  January  1993. (Automatic
cost  of
liv ing  adjustments  raised  salaries  to
$150,000  in 2002.) A United States District Court
judge had ruled that:
“ Automatic annual adjustments to congres-
sional salaries meet both the language and
the spirit of the 27th Amendment. . . . One
way to maintain high-quality government
is to provide our elected officials with a 
living wage that automatically changes to
reflect changed economic conditions. ”
—Judge Stanley Sporkin, 1992
In addition to their salaries, members of Con-
gress  enjoy  a  number  of benefits  and  resources.
These  include  stationery, postage  for official busi-
ness  (called  the  “franking  priv ilege”), a medical
clinic, and a gymnasium.
Members  also  receive  large  allowances  to  pay
for their office staff and assistants, trips home, tele-
phones, telegrams, and  newsletters. All members
are  entitled  to  an  income  tax  deduction  to  help
maintain  two  residences, one  in  their  home  state
and one in Washington, D.C. Moreover, when they
retire, senators  and  representatives may be  eligible
for pensions of $150,000 or more a year for life.
Privileges  of  Members The  Constitution
provides members of Congress certain protections
while  they  carry  out  their  legislative  duties. They
are  free  from  arrest “in  all  cases  except  treason,
felony, and  breach   of the  peace,” when  they  are 
attending  Congress  or  on  their  way  to   or  from
Congress. Members  of Congress  cannot  be  sued
for anything they say on the House or Senate floor.
This privilege does not extend to what members
may say outside of Congress. In Hutchinson v. Prox-
mire 2 (1979), the Supreme Court  ruled  that mem-
bers  of Congress  may  be  sued  for  libel  for  state-
ments they make in news releases or newsletters.
The  Senate  and  the  House  both  may  judge
members’ qualifications  and  decide  whether  to
seat them. Each house may refuse to seat an elected
member  by   a  majority   vote. This  power  of
exclusion was later defined by the Supreme Court

See the following footnoted materials in the Reference Handbook:
1. The Constitution, pages 774 –799. 
2. Hutchinson v. Proxmire  case summary, page 760. 

120-131 CH05S1-860053  12/7/04  11:12 PM  Page 129

in  the  case  of Powell v. McCormack (see  Supreme
Court Cases  to Debate  on  page  131). Each  house
may  also “punish  its  own members  for  disorderly
behavior” by a majority vote and expel a legislator
by a two-thirds vote. Only the most serious offens-
es such as treason or accepting bribes are grounds
for expulsion. Members who are guilty of lesser of-
fenses may  be  censured. Censure is  a  vote  of for-
mal disapproval of a member’s actions.

commissioner  from  Puerto  Rico, none  of whom
can  vote. However, they do  attend  sessions, intro-
duce bills, speak in debates, and vote in committees.
Characteristics Nearly  half the members  of
Congress are lawyers. A large number of members
also come from business, banking, and education.
Why are there so many lawyers? Because lawyers by
profession  deal with  laws, it  is  logical  for  them  to
serve as  legislators. Training  in  law helps a  legisla-
The Members of Congress
tor  understand  the  complex  legal  issues  that may
affect legislation.
Congress  includes  535  voting members—
Senators and representatives typically have been
100 senators and 435 representatives. In ad-
white, middle-aged males. The average age of mem-
dition, there are 4 delegates  in  the House—1 each
bers of Congress is usually over 50. Slowly Congress
from  the District  of Columbia, Guam, American
has  begun  to  reflect  the  racial, ethnic, and  gender 
Samoa, and  the  Virgin  Islands—and  1  resident
diversity of the general population.
Profile of the 109th Congress
Profile of the 109th Congress

Party Affiliation

HOUSE

SENATE

D
e
m
ocrat202

1
Indepen d e n t
Race and Ethnic Background†

R e p ublican232

Hispanic*
26
Asian and 
Pacific Islanders
4

Hispanic* 
2
Asian and 
Pacific Islanders
2
African American 1

African
Americans
42
Caucasian
367

* Hispanics can  
   be of any race

Caucasian
95

HOUSE

SENATE

D
e
mocrat44
R e
1 Independent

p u blican55

Gender†

Women 
66

Men 
369

Men 
86

HOUSE

SENATE

Women 
14

Sources: www.senate.gov, www.house.gov.

†All figures represent total number of voting members of Congress.

Critical Thinking
 
                Congress is changing slowly to reflect America’s diverse population. 
Which house of Congress is more diverse?

CHAPTER 5: THE ORGANIZATION OF CONGRESS 129

120-131 CH05S1-860053  12/1/04  2:30 AM  Page 130

Reelection  to  Congress Membership  in
Congress  has  changed  very  slowly  because  office-
holders seldom lose reelection. One representative
put  it  simply: “All members of Congress have one
primary interest—to be reelected.” Beginning with
Franklin  Roosevelt’s  landslide  presidential  victo-
ries  in  the  1930s, incumbency  helped Democrats
dominate Congress in all but a few years.
Between 1945 and 1990, about 90 percent of all
incumbents, or  those members  already  in  office,
won reelection. In some elections, many seats went
unchallenged  because  opponents  knew  that  they
would  have  little  or  no  chance  of winning. One 
analyst  said  that winning  an  election  to Congress
for most members was  like  removing  olives  from 
a bottle—“after the first one, the rest come easy.”
Why have incumbents been so successful? First,
incumbents  find  it  easier  to  raise  campaign  funds
because  they  have  worked  with  so  many  people
while  representing  their  district. Second, many  dis-
tricts  have  been  gerrymandered  in  the  incumbent
party’s favor. Third, incumbents are better known to
voters, who see them at rallies and on television and
read about them in newspapers. Fourth, incumbents
use their position to help solve voters’ problems. Fi-
nally, incumbents win because the majority of voters
believe their incumbent best represents their views.
Campaigning  Online While  television  and
radio remain the dominant campaign technologies,
people  running  for Congress have begun using  the
Internet  as  a  campaign  tool. Challengers  for  open
seats  and  incumbents  in highly  competitive  races

are making  the  greatest use  of the Web. Nearly  all
candidates now have  election Web  sites  that  serve
as electronic brochures providing biographies, press
releases, lists  of upcoming  campaign  events, and
other  information. Candidates  also use  their  elec-
tion Web  sites  to  recruit  volunteers  and  to  raise
campaign  contributions. A  few  candidates  have
even used their Web sites to broadcast, in real time,
campaign events such as speeches.
Not  many  candidates, however, have  taken
advantage of the interactive capacities of the Internet.
In  recent  elections, for  instance, only  one in  ten
candidates has conducted “town hall” type meetings
with voters  through  their Web  sites. Some experts
predict  more  candidates  will  do  so  in  the  future.
Experts also  forecast  that  congressional  candidates
will make greater use of Web  technologies  such as
search  engines, portals, and  e-mail  lists  to  identify
voters in their districts interested in particular issues
like gun control or health care. The Internet can then
be used  to  communicate directly with  such voters
using specially targeted e-mails or Web sites. Finally,
experts anticipate more candidates will start using the
Internet  to  improve  communications within  their
campaign organizations.
GOVERNMENT

Student Web Activity Visit the United States
Government: Democracy  in Action Web site at
gov.glencoe.com and click on Chapter 5—Student
Web Activities for an activity about the congres-
sional membership.

S e c t i o n   1   A s s e s s m e n t
S e c t i o n   1   A s s e s s m e n t

Checking for Understanding
1. Main Idea In a graphic organizer similar to 
the one below, compare the qualifications for 
representatives 
House
Senate
and senators.
2. Define bicameral legislature, session, census,
reapportionment, redistrict, gerrymander, 
at-large, censure, incumbent.
3. Identify Elbridge Gerry, Twenty-seventh 
Amendment. 
4. How does Congress reapportion House seats
among the states every ten years?

130 CHAPTER 5: THE ORGANIZATION OF CONGRESS

Critical Thinking
5. Making Inferences Members of Congress 
spend part of their time working for reelection.
Which house has a greater percentage of its
time remaining for legislative work? Why?

Political Processes What percentage of 
people believe that their representative does
not listen to them? Formulate a questionnaire
that surveys voters about this issue.

120-131 CH05S1-860053  12/1/04  2:31 AM  Page 131

CASES TO DEBATE

Powell v.
McCormack, 1969
The Constitution gives 
Congress the power to be 
the “Judge of the Elections,
Returns and Qualifications of its own Members.” It establishes the age,
citizenship, and residence requirements for the House and Senate. Does the
Constitution allow Congress to judge qualifications beyond these three spe-
cific requirements? The case of Powell v. McCormack addressed this question.

Adam Clayton
Powell, Jr.

Background of the Case
Adam Clayton Powell, Jr., was reelected to 
the House of Representatives in November 1966.
However, a congressional investigation had already
disclosed questionable activities by Powell and
members of his staff during his previous terms. 
The House refused to seat Powell. In March 1967
Congress declared the seat vacant and notified the
governor of New York to order a new election.
Powell charged that he had been unlawfully 
excluded from his seat in the House and brought
suit in the federal courts. Speaker John McCormack
and four other officials were named as defendants.
They responded that Congress had authority under
the Constitution to judge the qualifications of its
own members. 
The federal district court dismissed the com-
plaint on the grounds that it did not have jurisdic-
tion in this matter. The United States Court of
Appeals for the District of Columbia refused to hear
the case on the grounds that it was essentially a
political question. The Supreme Court heard the
case of Powell v. McCormack in 1969. The 90th
Congress, to which Powell had been elected, was

no longer in session. In the meantime (1968) Pow-
ell had been elected again and seated in the 91st
Congress. His lawyers now asked the Court for back
salary for the two years he was denied his seat.

The Constitutional Issue
One constitutional question was whether the
case was justiciable—could be decided by the
Court—under the Constitution. The defendants held
that the case was not justiciable by the Court be-
cause the Constitution gave Congress, not the Court,
power to judge the qualifications of its members.
Further, defendants submitted that the ques-
tion was “political” and therefore not justiciable by
the Court. Finally, defendants asked whether the
Court could coerce officers of the House or issue 
injunctions compelling officers or employees of the
House to perform specific acts. 
Powell’s lawyers believed that Congress did not
have the power to judge the moral qualifications of
members. The Supreme Court referred to debates
at the Constitutional Convention that related to 
giving Congress power to judge its members’ 
qualifications.

Debating the Case
Debating the Case

Questions to Consider
1. What might be a far-reaching result if the Court
decided in favor of the Speaker?
2. What might be a far-reaching result if the Court
decided in favor of Adam Clayton Powell, Jr.?

You Be the Judge
Must Congress accept a member if he or she
meets the three basic tests—age, citizenship, and
residency? Does Adam Clayton Powell, Jr., deserve
back pay and restoration of his seniority rights? 

131

132-137 CH05S2-860053  12/1/04  2:31 AM  Page 132

Key Terms
constituents, caucus, majority leader, whips, bill,
calendars, quorum
Find Out
■ Why are committees more  important  in  the
House  than  they are  in  the Senate?
■ Why  is  the Rules Committee one of  the most
powerful committees  in  the House?
Understanding Concepts
Growth of Democracy Why does the majority
party often get the credit or blame for everything
Congress does?

S e c t i o n   2
S e c t i o n   2
The House of Representatives
Political division and debate is unavoidable
Reader’s Guide
in  democratic  government. Legislators
must have freedom to express their some-
times  inflammatory  opinions. Rules  are
necessary to help ensure fairness, to enable the leg-
islature to conduct business, and to protect the mi-
nority.
Article  I, Section 5 1, of the Constitution  says:
“Each House may determine  the Rules of its Pro-
ceedings.” Thomas  Jefferson  compiled  the  first 
parliamentary manual  for  the Senate when he was
vice  president. He  emphasized  the  importance  of
rules:
“ It is much more material that there be a
rule to go by, than what the rule is; that
there may be a uniformity of proceeding in
business not subject to the caprice [whims]
of the Speaker or captiousness [criticisms]
of the members. ”—Thomas Jefferson, 1797
Rules for Lawmaking
The main  task of each house of Congress
is  the  same—to make  laws. Because  the
House  and  Senate  differ  in  many  ways, each
house has organized itself to carry out its work of
making the laws. Complex rules and a structure
of leadership  enable Congress  to  carry  out  its
lawmaking duties.
Complex Rules Each chamber has scores of
precedents based on past rulings that serve as a
guide  to  conducting  business. The House  and
Senate  each  print  their  rules  every  two  years.
House rules are generally aimed at defining the
actions  an  individual  representative  can  take,
such as limiting representatives to speaking for
five minutes or less during a debate.

A  F loor  F ight   in  Cong ress
PH I LADE LPH IA ,   P ENN SY LVAN IA ,   1 7 9 8
D e b a t e   o n   t h e   S e d i t i o n
Ac t   h a s   r e a ch e d   s u ch
a   f u ro r   t h a t   r e p r e s en t a t ive s
a r e  n o   l on g e r  s a f e   in  ch am -
b e r s . In   a   h e a t e d   a r g um e n t
y e s t e rd ay, M r. G r i swo l d   o f
C o n n e c t i c u t   a t t a c k e d   M r.
Ly o n   o f Ve rm o n t   w i t h   a
c a n e . M r. Ly o n   d e f e n d e d
h im s e l f w i t h   f i r e   ton g s .
Ly o n   d e f e n d s   h im s e l f
F i r e   t o n g s   c a n n o t   r e -
m o v e   t h e   h o t   c o a l s   f r om
s p e e c h e s   o f F e d e r a l i s t s   w h o   p r om o t e   t h e   S e d i t i o n
A c t . M r. A l l e n   o f C o n n e c t i c u t , w h o   s u p p o r t s   t h e
S ed i t ion  Ac t , re ad  f rom  th e  Au ro ra , “Wh e re  a  l aw  sh a l l
h ave   b e en   p a s s ed   in   v io l a t ion   o f th e  Con s t i tu t ion   . . .
i s  t h e r e  any  a l t e r n a t ive  b e tw e en  a b an d onm en t  o f t h e
Con s t i t u t i o n  a n d  r e s i s t a n c e ? ” M r. G a l l a t i n  a d d r e s s e d
t h e   ch am b e r   to   r e ve a l   t h e   r e a l   p u r p o s e   o f t h e   S e d i -
t i o n  Ac t : to   s i l e n c e   a l l   Re p u b l i c a n s .

132 CHAPTER 5: THE ORGANIZATION OF CONGRESS

See the following footnoted materials in the Reference Handbook:
1. The Constitution, pages 774 –799. 

132-137 CH05S2-860053  12/1/04  2:31 AM  Page 133

The complex rules in the House are geared to-
ward moving legislation quickly once it reaches the
floor. House debates rarely last more than one day.
Moreover, leaders of the House of Representatives
have more  power  than  leaders  in  the  Senate. For
example, the rules of the House allow its leaders to
make key decisions about legislative work without
consulting other House members.
Committee Work Committees do most of the
work of Congress. In  the House, committee work
is more important than in the Senate. Because the
membership of the House is so large, its members
must  organize  themselves  into  smaller  groups  in
order  to  accomplish  their work  efficiently. In  the
committees  representatives  have more  influence
than on the House floor, and they have the time to
study and shape bills.
In  addition, representatives  tend  to  specialize
in  a  few  issues  that  are  impor tant  to  their 
constituents—the people in the districts they rep-
resent. For example, Major R. Owens, a representa-
tive  from Brooklyn, New York, is  the  only  trained

librarian  in Congress. He  emphasizes  the  impor-
tance  of libraries  in  promoting  literacy. As  an
African American, Owens  also  supports  funding
for African American  colleges  and  aid  for  under-
privileged students. He explains:
“We need more role models who will open
new possibilities for those who have been
excluded from the dreams that others take
for granted. ”
—Major R. Owens
Finally, because House members  are  elected
from  districts, much  of their  time  is  devoted  to
serving  the  interests  of their  constituents. John  J.
Duncan, Jr., of Tennessee said:
“ I have a firm belief we have too many laws
on the books now. . . . I’ve made it pretty
clear I believe constituent service is most
important and is where a freshman can be
most effective. ”—John J. Duncan, Jr., 1988

Making a Difference In 1944 Vernon Baker, a 
25-year-old army second 
lieutenant serving in World 
Making a Difference
War II, was shot in the wrist by 
a German sniper. He spent two
Vernon Baker
months in a segregated hospital,
then returned to lead his men
into battle. On the morning of
April 5, 1945, Baker destroyed
two enemy bunkers, an observa-
tion post, and three machine 
gun nests. His company was
nearly wiped out, but he ordered
the seven remaining men 
to retreat while he drew
enemy fire. Somehow, amid
exploding shells, Lieutenant
Baker escaped.
Although the army segre-
gated African Americans during
the war, Baker and his men
fought like heroes. Asked 
why he fought so courageously

Medal of 
Honor

for a country that treated him 
as a second-class citizen, Baker
replied, “I was a soldier with a
job to do, and I did it for the 
men I was leading.”
Presented with the Distin-
guished Service Cross for his ser-
vice in Italy, Baker remained in the
military after the war. When he re-
tired from the army in 1968, he
took a job with the Red Cross,
counseling needy military families.
In 1990 Army officials reex-
amined their records, looking for
congressional Medal of Honor
candidates among African Ameri-
cans with outstanding service in
World War II. Fifty years after his
act of bravery, Vernon Baker ac-
cepted the medal in a White
House ceremony. “It’s a great
day. We’ve all been vindicated,”
he said.

CHAPTER 5: THE ORGANIZATION OF CONGRESS 133

132-137 CH05S2-860053  12/1/04  2:31 AM  Page 134

(1)  organizing  and  unifying  party members; (2)
scheduling the work of the House; (3) making cer-
tain that lawmakers are present for key floor votes;
(4)  distributing  and  collecting  information; (5)
keeping  the House  in  touch  w ith  the  president;
and (6) influencing lawmakers to support the poli-
cies of their political party. The Constitution pro-
vides  only  for  the  presiding  officer  of the House.
Other  than  that, the House  chooses  all  its  other
leaders.
The  Speaker  of  the  House The  Speaker  of
the House is the presiding officer of the House and
its most  powerful  leader. The Constitution  states
that  the  House  “shall  choose  their  Speaker  and
other officers.” A caucus, or closed meeting, of the
majority  party  chooses  the House  Speaker  at  the
start  of each  session  of Congress, and  the  entire
House membership approves the choice of Speaker.
As both the presiding officer of the House and
the  leader  of the majority  party, the  Speaker  has
great  power. Presiding  over  the  sessions  of the
House, the  Speaker  can  influence  proceedings  by
deciding which members  to  recognize  first. The
Speaker also appoints the members of some com-
mittees, schedules  bills  for  action, and  refers  bills
to the proper House committee. Finally, the Speak-
er  of the House  follows  the  vice  president  in  the
line of succession to the presidency.
Today, Speakers rely as much on persuasion as
on their formal powers to exercise influence. On a
typical  day, the  Speaker may  talk with  dozens  of
fellow members  of Congress. Often  the  Speaker
does so just to listen to requests for a favor. As for-
mer  Speaker Thomas P. “Tip” O’Neill  once  put  it,
“The world  is  full  of little  things  you  can  do  for
people.” In return, the Speaker expects representa-
tives’ support on important issues.
House  Floor  Leaders The  Speaker’s  top  as-
sistant is the majority leader. The majority leader’s
job  is  to help plan  the party’s  legislative program,
steer important bills through the House, and make
sure the chairpersons of the many committees fin-
ish work on bills  important  to  the party. The ma-
jority  leader  is  the  floor  leader  of his  or  her
political party in the House and, like the Speaker, is
elected  by  the majority  party. Thus, the majority
leader  is  not  actually  a House  official  but  a  party
official.

Speaking Frankly Members of
Congress don’t need stamps for their official
mail: their signature, real or printed, is known
as a frank and is accepted by the Post Office.
Franking cannot be used for personal
business or for political campaigns. It can be
used only on letters mailed to constituents.
Because this privilege gives incumbents an
advantage during an election year, members
of Congress can’t send out large volumes of
franked mail right before an election.

Importance of Party Affiliation Many proce-
dures in Congress are organized around the political
party affiliation of members. In both the House and
Senate, the Republicans  sit on  the  right  side of the
chamber, the Democrats on  the  left. In  each house
the majority party  selects  the  leaders of that body,
controls  the  flow of legislative work, and  appoints
committee chairs. The power to organize the House
explains  why  some  conservative  Democrats
switched to the Republican Party when it became the
majority party in Congress after the 1994 election.
The  Republican  majority  began  sweeping
changes of House rules in 1995, promoted to make
the House more  accountable. Some  changes  cen-
tralized power  in  the  speakership  in order  to help
Republicans carry out their agenda. The new rules
provided  for  fewer  committees, fewer  staff mem-
bers, term limits for chairpersons and the Speaker,
and  an  end  to  absentee  voting  in  committees.
Despite  strong  resistance  from  the  Democratic
leaders in the House, the new Republican majority
was able to push through the reforms.

House Leadership
Organized  leadership coordinates  the work
of the 435 individual members of the House
of Representatives. These leaders serve 6 purposes:

134 CHAPTER 5: THE ORGANIZATION OF CONGRESS

132-137 CH05S2-860053  12/1/04  2:32 AM  Page 135

The majority leader has help from the majori-
ty whip  and  deputy whips. These whips serve  as
assistant  floor  leaders  in  the House. The majority
whip’s  job  is  to watch  how majority-party mem-
bers  intend  to  vote  on  bills, to  persuade  them  to
vote  as  the  par ty   w ishes, and  to   see  that  par ty
members are present to vote.
The minority party in the House also elects its
own  leaders. These  include  the  minority   leader
and  the  minority   whips. The  responsibilities  of
these  leaders  are much   the  same  as  those  of the
majority party’s leaders, except they have no power
over scheduling work in the House.

Lawmaking in the House
To a visitor, the floor of the House of Repre-
sentatives may  seem  totally  disorganized.
Some  representatives  talk  in  small  groups  or  read
newspapers. Others  constantly walk  in  and out of

the chamber. Most representatives are not even on
the floor, because they are in committee meetings,
talking with  voters, or  taking  care  of other  busi-
ness. Representatives reach the floor quickly, how-
ever, when  it  is  time  for  debate  or  a  vote   on
proposed bills.
Usually, the House  starts  its  floor  sessions  at
noon or earlier. Buzzers ring in members’ offices in
the House office buildings, committee rooms, and
in the Capitol, calling representatives. The House is
normally in session from Monday through Friday.
Mondays  are  for  routine work. Not much  is done
on Friday because many representatives leave to go
to  their  home  districts  over  the weekend. Thus,
most of the House’s important work is done from
Tuesday through Thursday.
How  House  Bills  Are  Scheduled All 
laws  start  as  bills. A  proposed  law  is  called  a  bill
until  both  houses  of Congress  pass  it  and  the 

COMPARING Governments
COMPARING Governments
Selected National Legislatures
Method of 
Term of 
Number of 
Selection
Office
Members

Legislative Chamber(s)

Country 

Date of Last 
Constitution

Egypt

National Peoples Assembly

454

5 yrs.

popular election

1971

Israel

Knesset

120

4 yrs.

popular election

1949

Japan

Mexico

Russia

Diet
  House of Representatives
  House of Councillors

480**
252

Chamber of Deputies
Senate

State Duma
Federation Council

500
128

450
178

4 yrs.
6 yrs.

3 yrs.
6 yrs.

elected by local 
and national 
constituencies

popular election
popular election

4 yrs.*
4 yrs.*

popular election
local election

1947

1917

1993

United 
Kingdom

House of Commons
House of Lords

659**
500***

United 
States

House of Representatives
Senate

435
100

5 yrs.
life

2 yrs.
6 yrs.

popular election
appointed

no written 
constitution

popular election
popular election

1789

* Initial term was two years; changed 
   to four after second election.

Source: CIA, The World Factbook (Washington, D.C.).

** Number varies.

*** Normal attendance is 300, but many 
       more vote on key decisions.

Critical Thinking
                         Culture and history play large roles in how legislatures are formed around the 
world. In what two ways is the United Kingdom unique among the countries shown above?

CHAPTER 5: THE ORGANIZATION OF CONGRESS 135

132-137 CH05S2-860053  12/1/04  2:32 AM  Page 136

Parliamentary
Procedure

articipating
articipating
I N   G O V E R N M E N T
I N   G O V E R N M E N T
Like Congress, all deliberative as-
semblies need rules to conduct
business in a fair and impartial
way. Rules of order had their origin
in early British Parliaments. Thomas
Jefferson’s Manual of Parliamentary
Practice (1801) provided rules for
the new United States government.
Many groups use Robert’s Rules of
Order, first published in 1876 by
U.S. army officer Henry M. Robert. 
Robert’s Rules addresses such
issues as: 
1. How to make a motion and how
to amend a motion
2. What rank or precedence various
kinds of motions have
3. How to table or suspend a motion

4 How to close or extend debate
5. How to raise the question of 
consideration and how to vote
6. What duties and powers the 
presiding officer has
Activity
1. Obtain a copy of Robert’s Rules 
of Order. Appoint a small group to
find rules pertaining to the items
listed above. Discuss the needs
of a small group meeting (about
the size of your class). Write rules
for such a meeting based on
these needs. 
2. Choose a presiding officer for a
meeting of your government class
and a parliamentarian to enforce
the rules. Hold a meeting in which
the class determines an issue to
discuss, hears opinions from the
floor, and decides whether to take
any action.

president  signs  it. According  to  the  procedure 
currently in place, to introduce a bill in the House,
representatives  drop  it  into  the  hopper, a  ma-
hogany  box  that  is  accessible  to  all  near  the  front 
of the chamber.
After  a  bill  is  introduced, the  Speaker  of the
House  sends  it  to  the  appropriate  committee  for
study, discussion, and  rev iew. Of the  thousands 
of bills  and  resolutions  introduced  during  each
legislative  term  of Congress, only  about  10  to  20
percent  ever  go  to  the  full House  for  a  vote. Bills
that survive the committee process are put on one
of the House calendars. Calendars list bills that are
up for consideration.
The House  has  five  calendars. Three  are  used
to  schedule  different  kinds  of bills  for  considera-
tion. The Union Calendar  lists  bills  dealing with
money  issues. Most  other  public  bills  are  put  on
the  House  Calendar. The  Private  Calendar  lists
bills that deal with individual people or places. Any
bill that the House gives unanimous consent to de-
bate  out  of regular  order  is  listed  on  the Consent
Calendar. Finally, the Discharge Calendar  is  used
for petitions to discharge a bill from committee.

136 CHAPTER 5: THE ORGANIZATION OF CONGRESS

The  House  Rules  Committee The  Rules
Committee serves  as  the “traffic  officer” in  the
House, helping to direct the flow of major  legisla-
tion. It is one of the oldest House committees, and
the most powerful. After a  committee has  consid-
ered  and  approved  a major  bill, it  usually  goes  to
the  Rules Committee. The  Rules Committee  can
move bills ahead quickly, hold  them back, or  stop
them completely.
Because the Rules Committee has the power to
decide  how  and when  legislation will  be  consid-
ered  by  the House, it  has  often  been  the  focus  of
political battles. From 1858 to 1910, the Speaker of
the House, as chair of the Rules Committee, dom-
inated the flow of legislation. In 1911 the House re-
volted  against  Speaker  Joseph  G. Cannon’s
authoritarian  leadership  and  removed  him  from
the Rules Committee.
In  1975 Democratic majorities  in  the House
once  again  placed  the  Rules  Committee  under
control  of the  Speaker. The Democratic Caucus
gave  the  Speaker  the  power  to  appoint, subject  to
caucus ratification, all majority-party members of
the Rules Committee. A former Speaker explained:

132-137 CH05S2-860053  12/1/04  2:32 AM  Page 137

“ The Rules Committee is an agent of the
leadership. It is what distinguishes us from
the Senate, where the rules deliberately
favor those who would delay. The rules of
the House . . . permit a majority to work
its will on legislation rather than allow it
to be bottled up and stymied. ”
—Speaker Jim Wright, 1987
Republicans became  the majority party  in  the
House  of Representatives  in  1995. Their  new
Speaker, Newt Gingrich, as minority  leader  in  the
previous Congress had sparked an ethics investiga-
tion that resulted in Speaker Jim Wright’s resigna-
tion. Gingrich  asser ted  the  power  to  appoint
committee  chairpersons, including  the  leader  of
the powerful Rules Committee.
Function  of  the  Rules  Committee Major
bills  that  reach  the  floor  of the House  for  debate
and for a vote do so by a “rule”—or special order—
from  the  Rules Committee. As major  bills  come
out  of committee, they  are  entered  on  either  the
Union  Calendar  or  the  House  Calendar  in  the
order  received. The  calendars  have  so many  bills
that  if they  were  taken  up  in  that  order, many
would never  reach  the  floor  before  the  end  of the
session. To resolve this problem, the chairperson of
the committee that sent the bill to the Rules Com-
mittee may  ask  for  it  to move  ahead of other bills
and  to  be  sent  to  the  House  floor. If the  Rules
Committee  grants  the  request, the  bill  moves

ahead. The  Rules Committee may  also  include  a
time  limit  for  debate  on  the  bill  and  specify  how
much the bill may be amended on the floor.
Other Purposes of the Rules Committee
The Rules Committee  also  settles disputes  among
other House committees. For example, the Armed
Services Committee may be considering a bill that
involves  an  area  also  covered  by  the Veterans’ Af-
fairs Committee. The  Rules Committee  can  help
resolve any dispute between the two committees.
Finally, the  Rules Committee  often  delays  or
blocks bills that representatives and House leaders
do not want to come to a vote on the floor. In this
way  the  Rules  Committee  draws  criticism  away
from members who might have to take an unpop-
ular stand on a bill if it reaches the floor.
A  Quorum  for  Business A  quorum is  the
minimum number of members who must be pre-
sent to permit a legislative body to take official ac-
tion. For  a  regular  session, a  quorum  consists  of
the majority  of the House—218 members. When
the House meets to debate and amend legislation it
may often sit as a Committee of the Whole. In that
case, only 100 members constitute a quorum. This
procedure helps speed the consideration of impor-
tant  bills. The  Committee  of the Whole  cannot
pass  a  bill. Instead, it  reports  the measure  back  to
the full House with whatever changes it has made.
The House then has the authority to pass or reject
the bill.

S e c t i o n   2   A s s e s s m e n t
S e c t i o n   2   A s s e s s m e n t

Checking for Understanding
1. Main Idea In a graphic organizer similar to the
one below, show three ways in which the Rules
Committee controls legislation.

Critical Thinking
6. Understanding Cause and Effect Why are
changes in House rules more likely to occur
when political control of the House shifts to 
another party?

Rules Committee

2. Define constituents, caucus, majority leader,
whips, bill, calendars, quorum.
3. Identify Rules Committee.
4. Analyze the role of House committees.
5. How does a representative introduce a bill in the
House?

Growth of Democracy Browse through current
newspapers and magazines to find out what
legislation the majority party in the House is
trying to pass. Make a chart of the key legisla-
tion and record its progress for several weeks.  

CHAPTER 5: THE ORGANIZATION OF CONGRESS 137

138-140 CH05S3-860053  12/1/04  2:33 AM  Page 138

S e c t i o n   3
S e c t i o n   3
The Senate
The Senate  is  a deliberative body. Senators
handle  issues  of specific  interest  to  them
in  their  committees, but  they  also  deal
w ith  many  other  issues  on  the  floor,
where  there  is plenty of time  for debate. Senators,
who  represent  entire  states, are  expected  to  know
something  about  and  deal  w ith  many  issues—
from national defense to social issues to farming.

Reader’s Guide

Key Terms
president pro tempore, filibuster, cloture
Find Out 
■ Why does  the Senate have  fewer  rules and a
less  formal atmosphere  than  the House?
■ Why does  the Senate usually  take  longer  than
the House  to pass a bill?
Understanding Concepts
Growth of Democracy Why do floor debates 
in the Senate often include powerful speeches
charged with emotion?

The Senate at Work
Visitors going from the House to the Senate
are often startled by the difference. The Sen-
ate  chamber  is  smaller  than  the House  chamber.
Usually  only  a  few  senators  attend  sessions. The
Senate chamber has 100 desks—one for each sen-
ator—facing a raised platform where the president
pro tem and another senator preside over sessions.
The  party  leaders  or  their  assistants  stay  in  the
Senate chamber at all times to keep the work mov-
ing and to look after their party’s interests.
Informal  Atmosphere In  the  Senate, the
rules  are more  flexible  than  in  the House. They
are  designed  to make  cer tain  that  all  senators
have maximum  freedom  to  express  their  ideas.
For  example, the Senate usually  allows unlimit-
ed  debate  on  proposed  legislation. Senate  rules
are  spelled  out  in  fewer  than  100  pages. With
fewer  rules, the  Senate  has  a more  informal  at-
mosphere  than  the House. They may  debate  a
proposal  on  and  off for weeks  or  even months
before taking action on an issue.
Senate  Leaders Leadership  in  the  Senate
closely  parallels  leadership  in  the House, but
the  Senate  has  no  Speaker. The  vice  president
presides in the Senate, but may not vote except
to  break  a  tie. Also, Senate  procedures  permit
individual senators more  freedom  in  their ac-
tiv ities. Consequently, par ty  leaders  in  the
Senate may not have as much influence over other
senators as their counterparts in the House.

F irst  Lady  E lected
N EW YORK ,  N .Y . ,  NOVEMBER 7 ,   2 0 0 0  
F i r s t   L ady   H i l l a r y   C l in ton , th e   D emo c r a t i c   c and i -
d a te   fo r   s en a to r   f rom  New  Yo r k , d e f e a ted  Repub -
l i c a n   C o n g r e s sm a n   R i c k
L a z i o . A t   f i r s t , C l i n t o n’s
r a ce   s e em ed   an   uph i l l   on e .
T h e   p r o b l em s   o f h e r   h u s -
b and ’s   p re s id en c y   l in g e red ,
a n d   s h e   f a c e d   a c c u s a t i o n s
o f b e i n g   a   c a r p e t b a g g e r,
s in ce   sh e   h ad   on l y   re cen t l y
e s t ab l i sh ed   re s id en c y   in   th e
s t a t e . C l i n t o n   c am p a i g n e d
H i l l a r y   C l i n t o n
h a r d , h ow e v e r, a n d   w o n  
by   a   h e a l t hy   5 5 - 4 3   p e r c e n t
m a r g i n . S h e   w a s   h e l p e d   b y   t h e   f a c t   t h a t   h e r   f i r s t
o p p on en t , New   Yo r k   C i t y   m ayo r   Ru d o l ph   G iu l i an i ,
d ropp ed   ou t   o f th e   r a ce  m id - c amp a i g n .

138 CHAPTER 5: THE ORGANIZATION OF CONGRESS

138-140 CH05S3-860053  12/1/04  2:33 AM  Page 139

The  Vice President The Constitution names
the  vice  president  as  president  of the  Senate. The
vice  president, however, does  not  have  the  same
role  and  power  as  the  Speaker  of the House. The
v ice  president may  recognize members  and  put
questions  to  a  vote. Because  the  vice  president  is
not  an  elected member  of the  Senate, he  or  she
may not take part in Senate debates. The vice pres-
ident may, if the  situation warrants, cast  a  vote  in
the  Senate, but  only  in  the  event  of a  tie. A  v ice
president may try to  influence the Senate through
personal contact with senators, however. Many re-
cent  vice  presidents  previously  served  as  senators
and thus had close relationships with their former
colleagues.
Most  v ice  presidents  find  Senate  duties  un-
challenging and devote much of their time to exec-
utive branch activities, leaving little time to preside
over  the  Senate. In  the  absence  of the  vice  presi-
dent, the president pro tempore (or president pro
tem)  presides. The  term  pro  tempore means “for

the  time  being.” The  Senate  elects  this  leader. The
president  pro  tempore  is  from  the majority  party
and is usually its most senior member.
Majority and Minority Floor Leaders The
majority and minority leaders are the most impor-
tant officers in the Senate. Elected by the members
of their political parties, the majority and minori-
ty  leaders  in  the  Senate  are  party  officials  rather
than  official  Senate  officers. The majority  leader’s
main  job  is  to  steer  the  party’s  bills  through  the
Senate. To  do  this, the majority  leader  plans  the
Senate’s work schedule and agenda in consultation
with the minority leader.
The majority  leader  is  responsible  for making
certain the majority party members attend impor-
tant  Senate  sessions  and  for  organizing  their  sup-
por t  on  key  bills. The  minority  leader  develops
criticisms  of the  majority  par ty’s  bills  and  tries 
to  keep  senators  in  the  minority  par ty  working 
together. As  in  the  House, whips  and  assistant

The Filibuster—Then and Now

Present During a 1960 filibuster 
Colorado Republican Gordon Allott,
draped in a bedsheet, left his cot to
proceed with his oration. 

▲

Past In 60 B.C., Cato the Younger
initiated a filibuster to block Caesar’s
election as consul.
▲

Legislative Techniques
Often senators simply 
threaten to filibuster to 
defeat legislative bills. 
Why would these threats
work?

139

138-140 CH05S3-860053  12/1/04  2:33 AM  Page 140

whips  assist  the majority  and minority  leaders  of
the  Senate  by  making  sure  that  legislators  are 
present for key votes.
How Senate Bills Are Scheduled As in the
House, any member of the Senate may introduce a
bill. Procedures  for moving bills  through  the Sen-
ate, however, are more informal than in the House.
Because it is smaller, the Senate has never needed a
committee  like  the House  Rules Committee. In-
stead, Senate  leaders  control  the  flow  of bills  to
committees  and  to  the  floor  for  debate  and  vote.
They do this by consulting closely with one anoth-
er and with other senators.
The Senate has only two calendars. The Calen-
dar of General Orders lists all  the bills  the Senate
will consider, while the Executive Calendar sched-
ules  treaties  and  nominations. The  Senate  brings
bills to the  floor by unanimous consent, a motion
by  all members  present  to  set  aside  formal  rules
and  consider  a  bill  from  the  calendar. The  proce-
dure has not  changed much  through  the  years. In
1913 Massachusetts  senator Henry Cabot  Lodge
explained  that  the  Senate  conducted most  of its
business through unanimous-consent agreements:
“Not only the important unanimous-
consent agreements which are reached often
with much difficulty on large and general-
ly contested measures, but constantly on
all the small business of the Senate we de-
pend on unanimous consent to enable us
to transact the public business. ”
—Henry Cabot Lodge, 1913
S e c t i o n   3   A s s e s s m e n t
S e c t i o n   3   A s s e s s m e n t

The  Filibuster Because  the  Senate  usually 
allows unlimited debate on any bill under consid-
eration, one way  for  senators  to  defeat  a  bill  they
oppose  is  to  filibuster  against  it. To  filibuster
means  to  stall  the  legislative  process  and  prevent 
a  vote. Stall  tactics  include  talking  continuously,
delaying issues in committee, and other procedural
roadblocks.
Senator  Strom  Thurmond  of South Carolina
set the record for a filibuster when he spoke against
the Civil  Rights Act  of 1957  for  24  hours  and  18
minutes. A  filibuster by a group of senators  could
go on for weeks or even months.
A filibuster can be stopped when three-fifths of
the Senate (60 members) votes for cloture. Cloture
is a procedure that allows each senator to speak only
1 hour  on  a  bill under debate. Obtaining  a  vote  in
favor  of cloture, however, is  usually  difficult,
especially  when  each  party  controls  close  to  the
same number of Senate seats.
The  filibuster  is  not  commonly  utilized  as
a legislative tactic in the Senate today. Senate rules
now  allow  other  matters  to  continue  during  a
filibuster, weakening  the  filibuster’s  effectiveness.
Because of the close division of political parties in
the Senate, the simple threat of a filibuster is often
enough to delay or defeat a bill.
Politics As  in the House, Senate procedures are
organized  around  the members’ party  affiliations.
Republicans  sit  on  the  right  side  of the  chamber,
while Democrats sit on the left. More importantly,
the majority  party  controls  the  flow  of legislative
work.

Checking for Understanding
1. Main Idea In a graphic organizer similar to the
one at the right, analyze 
Minority
Majority
the relationship between 
the Senate majority and 
minority leaders, whips, 
and assistant whips.
2. Define president pro tempore, filibuster, 
cloture.
3. Identify Calendar of General Orders. 
4. How does the Senate bring bills to the floor?

140 CHAPTER 5: THE ORGANIZATION OF CONGRESS

Critical Thinking
5. Making Comparisons Compare the rules and
procedures of the House with those of the 
Senate.

Growth of Democracy Search through a 
reference work of historic speeches. Use one
of the speeches as a model for a persuasive
speech of your own.

141-145 CH05S4-860053  12/1/04  2:33 AM  Page 141

S e c t i o n   4
S e c t i o n   4
Congressional Committees
W hile  the  subject  of R-rated  mov ies
Reader’s Guide
makes for a dramatic hearing, much
of the  detailed  day-to-day work  of
considering  proposed  legislation
takes  place  in  committees  that meet  in  congres-
sional  offices. Sometimes  the  hearings  are more
exciting  and  informative  than  the  floor  debates
that follow.

Key Terms
standing committee, subcommittee, select 
committee, joint committee, conference 
committee, seniority system
Find Out 
■ Why are several different kinds of committees
necessary  in  the House and Senate? 
■ Why are committee chairpersons considered
the most powerful members of Congress?
Understanding Concepts
Political Processes Why have committees 
become the power centers in Congress? 

Jud ic iar y  Comm ittee
Looks  at  Ho l lywood
WA SH INGTON ,  D .C . ,   S EPTEMBER 1 8 ,   2 0 0 0
A d s  
f i lm s
f o r   R- r a t e d  
show n  du r in g  te l e v i s ion
p r o g r am s   w i t h   a   l a r g e   p e r -
c en t a g e   o f v i ew e r s   un d e r   1 7
h ave   sp a r ked   a   S en a te   inve s -
t i g a t i o n . A   f e d e r a l   r e p o r t
a l s o   f o u n d   t h a t   u n d e r a g e
te en a g e r s   a re   e a s i l y   sn e a k in g
in to  R- r a ted  mov i e s .
M a n y   p e o p l e   i n   Ho l l y -
S t u d i o   e x e c u t i v e
wood   a re   su sp i c iou s   b e c au s e
t e s t i f i e s .
t h e   h e a r i n g s   a r e   b e i n g   h e l d
l e s s   th an   two   mon th s   b e fo re
a   n a t i o n a l   e l e c t i o n . “ I   t h i n k   i t ’s   a   b u n c h   o f w e a s e l s
s c r amb l in g  fo r  vo te s ,” s a id  L a r r y  Ka s ano f f , who  h e ad s
a   comp any   th a t   m a ke s   m ov i e s   b a s ed   on   a c t i on - o r i -
e n t e d   v i d e o   g am e s   l i k e   Mo r t a l   Kom b a t   a n d   D u k e
Nu kem .

Purposes of Committees
Both  the House  and  Senate  depend  upon
committees to effectively consider the thou-
sands of bills that are proposed each session. Com-
mittees  help  ease  the  workload  and  are  the  key
power centers in Congress.
The  committee  system  serves  several  impor-
tant  purposes. First, it  allows members  of Con-
gress  to  div ide  their work  among many  smaller
groups. Lawmakers can become specialists on the
issues  their  committees  consider. This  system  is
the only practical way for Congress to operate be-
cause no  lawmaker can possibly know the details
of each  of the  thousands  of bills  introduced  in
each term of Congress.
Second, from the huge number of bills intro-
duced in each Congress, committees select those
few  that  are  to  receive  fur ther  consideration.
Committees  are  the  places  in which  lawmakers
listen to supporters and opponents of a bill. It is
in committees where they work out compromis-
es, and decide which bills will or will not have a
chance  to  become  law. Most  bills  never  get  be-
yond the committee stage.
Third, by  holding  public  hearings  and  in-
vestigations, committees  help  the  public  learn
about  key  problems  and  issues  facing  the 
nation. Congressional  committees  have  called
the  public’s  attention  to  such  issues  as  orga-
nized  crime, the  safety  of prescription  drugs,
hunger  in Amer ica, airline  safety, and many
other  issues  and  concerns  that have  confront-
ed the nation.

CHAPTER 5: THE ORGANIZATION OF CONGRESS 141

141-145 CH05S4-860053  12/1/04  2:34 AM  Page 142

Kinds of Committees
Congress  has  four  basic  kinds  of commit-
tees: (1)  standing  committees; (2)  select
committees; (3) joint committees; and (4) confer-
ence  committees. Congress may, however, change
the method  of committee  organization  and  the
number of committees.
Standing Committees Very early in its histo-
ry, Congress  set  up  permanent  groups  to  oversee
bills  that  dealt with  certain  kinds  of issues. These
are called standing committees because they con-
tinue  from  one Congress  to  the  next. The House
and  Senate  each  create  their  own  standing  com-
mittees  and  control  their  areas  of jurisdiction,
occasionally  adding  or  eliminating  a  standing
committee when necessary.
The majority party has power to write the rules
in  Congress. Republicans  made  changes  in  the
structure  and  titles  of several  committees  when
they became the majority in 1995. They also set six-
year  term  limits  for  committee  chairpersons. The
last major  realignment  of standing  committees  in
the Senate took place in 1977.
Because the majority party in each house con-
trols  the  standing  committees, it  selects  a  chair-
person  for  each  from  among  its  party members.
The  majority  of the  members  of each  standing
committee are also members of the majority party.

Party membership on committees is usually divid-
ed  in  direct  propor tion  to  each  par ty’s  strength 
in  each  house. For  example, if 60  percent  of the
members  of the House  are  Republicans, then  60
percent  of the members  of each House  standing
committee will  be  Republicans. Thus, a  10-mem-
ber  committee would  have  6  Republicans  and  4
Democrats. However, the  par ty  in  power  in  the
House will often have a super majority on the most
important committees.
Subcommittees Nearly  all  standing  commit-
tees  have  several  subcommittees. Each  subcom-
mittee  specializes  in  a  subcategory  of its  standing
committee’s  responsibility. Subcommittees, like
standing  committees, usually  continue  from  one
Congress  to  the next, although  the majority party
may make  changes. For  example, House  Republi-
cans  in  the 104th Congress  limited most commit-
tees  to  no  more  than  five  subcommittees. The
exceptions were Appropriations with  13  subcom-
mittees, Government  Reform  and Oversight with 
7  subcommittees, and  Transportation  and  Infra-
structure with 6 subcommittees.
Select  Committees From  time  to  time, each
house of Congress has created temporary commit-
tees. Usually, these committees, called  select com-
mittees, study  one  specific  issue  and  report  their
findings  to  the  Senate  or  the House. These  issues

The V-Chip
T o address the concerns of many parents who
felt that TV violence was contributing to aggres-
sive behavior in young children, Congress
gave parents more control over home television
viewing. Use of a V-chip is part of a new communi-
cations policy that became law in 1996. 
The law requires manufacturers to install a V-
chip in new television sets beginning in 1998. This
computer chip enables parents to block out shows
that have been coded as violent, lewd, or inappro-
priate for young children. 
Legislators know that widespread use of the V-
chip will come only after older television sets are
no longer in service. However, the device provides

142

politicians a way of tak-
ing action on TV vio-
lence without stirring up a
controversy over censorship.
Most children’s activists have 
welcomed the V-chip, although 
they realize it will not be effective 
without parents’ active participation.

The V-chip

articipating
articipating
I N   G O V E R N M E N T  
I N   G O V E R N M E N T  

A C T I V I T Y
A C T I V I T Y

Debate  the  Issue Do you  think  the V-chip  is a
real solution  to violence viewed on  television?
Analyze  the  issue and present your view.

141-145 CH05S4-860053  12/1/04  2:34 AM  Page 143

Standing Committees of Congress
Standing Committees of Congress

House Committees
Agriculture

Appropriations

Armed Services

Budget

Education and the Workforce

Energy and Commerce

Financial Services

Government Reform

House Administration

International Relations

Judiciary

Resources

Rules

Science

Small Business
Standards of Official Conduct

Transportation and Infrastructure

Veterans' Affairs

Ways and Means

Sources: www.house.gov; www.senate.gov

Senate Committees
Agriculture, Nutrition, and Forestry
Appropriations
Armed Services
Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs
Budget
Commerce, Science, and Transportation
Energy and Natural Resources
Environment and Public Works
Finance
Foreign Relations
Governmental Affairs
Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions
Judiciary
Rules and Administration
Small Business and Entrepreneurship
Veterans' Affairs

Subcommittees
Health
Human Resources
Oversight
Select Revenue Measures
Social Security
Trade

Critical Thinking
 
 
    Congressional committees have changed in recent decades. The House rules 
adopted in the 104th Congress limited most standing committees to no more than five 
subcommittees. What is the difference between standing committees and select committees?

can  include: (1) matters  of great  public  concern,
such as organized crime; (2) overlooked problems,
such as hunger; or (3) problems of interest groups,
such  as  owners  of small  business, who  claim  that
Congress has not met  their needs. Select commit-
tees  usually  cannot  repor t  bills  to  their  parent
chamber, however.
Select  committees were  usually  set  up  to  last
for  no more  than  one  term  of Congress. In  prac-
tice, however, select  committees may  be  renewed
and  continue  to meet  for  several  terms  of Con-
gress. For  this  reason, both  the House  and  Senate
have reclassified several select committees, such as
the  Select  Intelligence Committee, as  permanent
committees. In 1993 the House terminated four se-
lect committees.

Joint Committees Made up of members from
both  the House  and  the Senate, joint committees
may be either temporary or permanent. Like other
committees, they have members from both politi-
cal  parties. These  committees—such  as  the  Joint
Economic  Committee—usually  act  as  study
groups with responsibility for reporting their find-
ings back to the House and Senate.
In  theory, joint  committees  coordinate  the
work  of the  two  houses  of Congress. In  practice,
lawmakers  usually  limit  joint  committees  to  han-
dling  routine matters  such  as  are  handled  by  the
Joint Committee on Printing, and  the Joint Com-
mittee  on  the  Library  of Congress. Some  joint
committees, however, have  been  set  up  to  study
more  volatile  matters  such  as  atomic  energy,

CHAPTER 5: THE ORGANIZATION OF CONGRESS 143

141-145 CH05S4-860053  12/2/04  5:27 PM  Page 144

Legislative Leadership

Committee Membership Senate
Judiciary Committee Chairman Orrin
Hatch (UT, left) and Patrick Leahy (VT,
right) confer during hearings to confirm
the nomination of Attorney General
John Ashcroft in 2001. Evaluate 
the motivation behind requests 
for committee assignments. Why
would a senator seek assignment
to judiciary, foreign relations, or
budget committees? To commit-
tees that could benefit his or her
constituents?

defense, and  taxation. Joint  committees  do  not
have  the  authority  to  deal  directly with  bills  or  to
propose legislation to Congress.
Conference Committees No bill can be sent
from Congress  to  the  president  until  both  houses
have  passed  it  in  identical  form. A  conference
committee is a temporary committee set up when
the House  and  Senate  have  passed  different  ver-
sions of the  same bill. Members of the conference
committee, called  conferees, usually  come  from
the House  and  Senate  standing  committees  that
handled  the  bill  in  question. Democrats  and  Re-
publicans are represented  in  the same way here as
on other committees.
The  job of the  conference  committee  is  to  re-
solve  the  differences  between  the  two  versions  of
the bill. Conference  committees play  a  key  role  in
policy making  because  they work  out  a  bill  that
both houses may accept and send to the president.
The committee accomplishes this task by bargain-
ing over each section of the bill. A majority of the
conferees  from  each  house must  accept  the  final
compromise  bill—called  a  conference  repor t—
before  it  can  be  sent  to  the  floor  of the  House 
and  Senate. When  the  conference  committee’s
report—the compromise bill  it has  finally worked

144 CHAPTER 5: THE ORGANIZATION OF CONGRESS

out—reaches  the  floor  of each  house, it must  be
considered as a whole and may not be amended. It
must be accepted or rejected as it is when it comes
from the conference committee.

Choosing Committee Members
Membership  in  congressional  committees
is  extremely  important  to  the  role  played
by members of Congress. Assignment to the right
committees  can  help  strengthen  a member’s  ca-
reer  in  several  ways. First, membership  on  some
committees can increase a lawmaker’s chances for
reelection. For  freshmen, the  best  committees
may be  those  that deal with bills  that will benefit
a lawmaker’s state or district.
Second, membership on some committees can
mean  the  lawmaker will  be  able  to  influence  na-
tional  policy making. Committees  that  often  help
formulate  national  policies  include  those  dealing
with  education, the  budget, health, the  judiciary,
and foreign policy. Third, some committees enable
a member to exert influence over other lawmakers
because they deal with matters important to every-
one  in  Congress. Some  of these  committees  in-
clude  the House Rules Committee and  taxation
and appropriations committees.

141-145 CH05S4-860053  12/1/04  2:34 AM  Page 145

In  the  House  the  key  committees  are  Rules,
Ways and Means, and Appropriations. In the Sen-
ate the most prestigious committees are Foreign Re-
lations, Finance, and Appropriations. Assignment to
the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, for exam-
ple, will give a  lawmaker a chance  to directly  influ-
ence  American  foreign  policy. Senators  on  this
committee usually receive a great deal of publicity.
Assignment  to  Committees In  both  the
House and Senate, the political parties assign mem-
bers  to  the  standing  committees. Newly  elected
members of Congress who wish to serve on a partic-
ular  committee  or  veteran  lawmakers who wish  to
transfer  to  another  committee may  request  assign-
ment to the committees on which they want to serve.
Each member may only serve on a limited number
of standing committees and subcommittees.
The  Committee  Chairperson’s  Role
Along  w ith  par ty  leaders, the  chairpersons  of
standing committees are the most powerful mem-
bers  of Congress. They  make  the  key  decisions
about  the work  of their  committees—when  their
committees will meet, which bills they will consid-
er, and  for  how  long. They  decide when  hearings
will  be  held  and which witnesses will  be  called  to
testify  for  or  against  a  bill. In  addition, chairper-
sons may hire committee  staff members and con-
trol  the  committee  budget. Finally, they manage
the  floor  debates  that  take  place  on  the  bills  that
come from their committees.

Since  the  1970s  the  powers  of committee
chairpersons  have  been  limited  somewhat. The
Legislative  Reorganization Act  of 1970 made  the
committee system more democratic by allowing a
majority  of committee members  to  call meetings
without  the  chairperson’s  approval. It  also  stated
that  committee members who  disagree with  the
chairperson must have time to present their views
and  that  reasonable  notice must  be  given  for  all
committee hearings. Rule changes in 1995 prohib-
ited the chairperson from casting an absent mem-
ber’s  vote  and  required  committees  to  publish  all
members’ votes.
The Seniority System The unwritten rule of
seniority  traditionally  has  guided  the  selection 
of chairpersons. The  senior ity  system gave  the
member of the majority party with the longest un-
interrupted  service  on  a particular  committee  the
leadership of that committee.
Criticism of the seniority system has resulted in
several changes. Beginning in 1971, House Repub-
licans  voted  by  secret  ballot  to  select  the  highest-
ranking Republican  on  each  committee. In  1973
the Democrats, who were the majority party in the
House, adopted  the  same  procedure. In  a  historic
action  in 1975, House Democrats  voted  to  replace
three  senior  committee  chairpersons. In  1995 Re-
publicans also bypassed several senior members up
for  chairs  and  ruled  that  chairpersons  of House
committees could hold their positions for no more
than three consecutive terms.

S e c t i o n   4   A s s e s s m e n t
S e c t i o n   4   A s s e s s m e n t

Joint

both

Conference

Checking for Understanding
1. Main Idea In a Venn diagram, show how a 
conference committee 
and a joint committee 
are alike and how they 
are different.
2. Define standing committee, subcommittee, 
select committee, joint committee, conference
committee, seniority system.
3. Identify Select Intelligence, Rules, Ways and
Means, Appropriations Committees. 
4. List four important powers of a committee 
chairperson.

Critical Thinking
5. Making Inferences Why did Republicans, when
they won control of Congress in 1995, institute
many rule changes?

Political Processes Watch coverage of a con-
gressional committee on television, or read
about it in a newspaper. Outline the major 
issues presented in the testimony before the
committee. Write a position paper in which 
you agree or disagree with the witnesses. 

CHAPTER 5: THE ORGANIZATION OF CONGRESS 145

146-155 CH05S5-860053  12/1/04  2:35 AM  Page 146

S e c t i o n   5
S e c t i o n   5
Staf f and Suppor t Agencies
The  work  of Congress  is  so  massive  and
Reader’s Guide
complicated that lawmakers need trained
staffs  to  help  them  do  their work  effec-
tively. Staff members  also  carry  out  the
work  of congressional  committees. In  addition, a
number  of supporting  agencies  perform  impor-
tant functions for members.
House rules in 1995 cut the total of committee
staff by  one-third  compared  to  the  levels  of the
previous Congress. The Senate also made less dra-
matic  cuts—a  15  percent  reduction  in  committee
staff. At the same time Congress adopted a resolu-
tion  to  cut  the  legislative  branch  budget  and  re-
duced  the  budget  of the  General  Accounting
Office. Such staff reductions are rare.

Key Terms
personal staff, committee staff, administrative 
assistant, legislative assistant, caseworker
Find Out 
■ Why do members of Congress have  large per-
sonal and committee staffs?
■ How could a committee staffer have more 
influence  than a member of Congress over a
proposed bill? 
Understanding Concepts
Political Processes How do staffs and support
agencies help members of Congress carry out their
many responsibilities?

House  Aud its  Books
WA SH INGTON ,  D .C . ,   J ANUARY 1 9 9 5
T h e   n e w   R e p u b l i c a n
m a j o r i t y   w a s t e d   n o
t im e   i n   “c l e a n i n g   h o u s e .”
F i r s t , t h e y   o rd e r e d   an   a u d i t
o f Ho u s e   r e co rd s . T h en   t h e
Ho u s e   O v e r s i g h t   C omm i t -
t e e  vo t e d   to   t r im  s t a f f i n   t h e
t e l e v i s i on   o f f i c e   an d   r e d u c e
R e p u b l i c a n   l o g o
s t a f f in   t h e  p h o to g r a p hy  o f -
f i c e . Mem b e r s   o f C o n g r e s s
wo u l d   n ow   h ave   to   p ay   t h e   f u l l   co s t   o f s u ch   s e r v i c e s
o u t   o f t h e i r   ow n   o f f i c e   f u n d s . T h e   n e w   m a j o r i t y
p a r t y   a l s o   c u t   9 6   s t a f f p o s i t i o n s   t h a t   w e r e   a t t a ch e d  
t o   2 8   l e g i s l a t i v e   s e r v i c e   o r g a n i z a t i o n s . T h e   s e r v i c e
o r g a n i z a t i o n s   d a t e d   b a c k   t o   1 9 5 9   w h e n   C o n g r e s s
c e r t i f i e d   t h e   D em o c r a t i c   S t u d y   G r o u p   t o   a n a l y z e
l e g i s l a t i o n .

146 CHAPTER 5: THE ORGANIZATION OF CONGRESS

Congressional Staff Role
When  Lowell Weicker  of Connecticut was
in the Senate, a woman wrote to him com-
plaining about the way an airline had handled her
dog. The dog, shipped  as  animal  cargo, had died
in  flight. One  of the  senator’s  secretaries men-
tioned  the  letter  to  the  press  secretary, who
thought  that  perhaps  the  incident  had  news
value. He  phoned  the  Federal Aviation Agency
and  other  government  offices  and  found  that
there had been many similar cases. After inform-
ing  the  senator, the  secretary wrote  a  draft  of a
bill to authorize the Transportation Department
to  regulate  air  transpor t  of animals. Senator 
Weicker  later  introduced  the  legislation  on  the
floor of the Senate. The story became headlines
in Weicker’s  home  state, and  he  received many
letters of appreciation.
This  story  illustrates  that  congressional
staff members do much of the important work
on legislation. Lawmakers rely on their staffs to
help  them  handle  the  grow ing  workload  of
Congress, communicate with  voters, help  run
committee  hearings  and  floor  sessions, draft
new bills, write committee reports, and attend
committee meetings. Congressional staffs also

146-155 CH05S5-860053  12/1/04  2:35 AM  Page 147

members work directly for individual senators and
representatives. Committee  staff members work
for the many House and Senate committees.
The  size  of senators’ personal  staffs  varies  be-
cause allowances to pay for them are based on the
population of the senator’s state and distance from
the  capital. Senators  each  receive  a  yearly  budget
to  operate  their  offices. Most  of this  amount  is  to
pay staff salaries. About one-third of personal staff
members work in the legislators’ home states. The
rest work in Washington, D.C. Each member of the
House has an allowance to pay for a personal staff.
The House  and  Senate  employ  thousands  of per-
sonal staff aides. Lawmakers can hire and fire staff
members at will.
Administrative Assistants Lawmakers usu-
ally have  three  types of personal  staff members  in
their  offices. The  administrative  assistant, called
an AA, is a very important legislative aide. The AA
runs the lawmaker’s office, supervises the lawmak-
er’s schedule, and gives advice on political matters.
A good AA also deals with influential people from
the lawmaker’s congressional district or state, who
may influence the lawmaker’s reelection.

An Expanding Government

help  lawmakers  get  reelected. Staffers  help mem-
bers of Congress get publicity, keep an eye on po-
litical  developments  back  home, and  write
speeches  and  newsletters. They  also  help  raise
funds  for  election  campaigns  and meet with  lob-
byists and visitors from home.

Congressional Staff Growth
Congress  has  not  always  relied  on  staff to
accomplish  its work. For  almost  100  years,
senators and representatives had no personal aides.
Occasionally they might hire assistants out of per-
sonal  funds, but Congress  provided  no  paid  staff.
Inadequate  staffing  had  become  an  urgent  com-
plaint by the time Congress considered the Legisla-
tive  Reorganization  Act  in  1946. After  that  the
number  of staff members  increased  dramatically.
The House  and  Senate  employed  2,000  personal
staff members  in  1947, but more   than  11,500  in
1990. Committee staff increased from 400 to more
than 3,000 in that same period.
Congressional  staffs  grew  as  lawmaking  be-
came more complex after the early 1900s. Lawmak-
ers could not be experts on all the issues that came
before  their  committees  or  upon
which they voted  in Congress. Hav-
ing  a  large  staff became  one way  to
get  expert  help. Also, the  demands
that constituents placed on lawmak-
ers  increased  over  the  years. Mem-
bers  of Congress  needed  a  large
office  staff simply  to  deal w ith  the
many  letters  from  people  in  their
states  or  congressional  districts. In
addition to writing to their senators
and  representatives, voters  in  in-
creasing  numbers  have   turned  to
their  lawmakers  for  help  in  solving
problems. One lawmaker explained,
“More than half my total staff time is
devoted to resolving individual diffi-
culties  that  have  developed  between
citizens and their government.”

Personal Staff
Congress  includes  two  types
of staffs: personal  staff and
committee  staff. Personal  staff

Public Perceptions Members of Congress must balance
the need for large staffs with the need to cut government
spending. What public perception of Congress does the
cartoonist enhance with this cartoon?

CHAPTER 5: THE ORGANIZATION OF CONGRESS 147

146-155 CH05S5-860053  12/1/04  2:35 AM  Page 148

Legislative  Assistants Legislative  assis-
tants, or  LAs, are  a  second  type  of personal  staff
member. An LA makes certain that the lawmaker is
well informed about the many bills with which she
or he must deal. An LA does  research, drafts bills,
studies  bills  currently  in  Congress, and  writes
speeches and articles for the lawmaker.
Another  important  part  of the  LA’s  job  is  to 
assist  the  lawmaker  in  committee meetings  and  to
attend  committee  meetings  when  the  lawmaker
cannot  be  present. Senators  and  representatives 
are members of so many committees and subcom-
mittees  that  they  cannot  possibly  attend  all 
the committee meetings. When they do attend com-
mittee  meetings, they  often  come  in  at  the  last
minute  and  briefly  talk with  their LA  to  find  out
what has taken place. The LA, who has followed the
meeting and  studied  the bill  in question, may have
prepared  a  short  speech  for  the  lawmaker or made
up  a  list  of questions  for  the  lawmaker  to  ask 

Aiding Lawmakers

Influencing Congress Members of Con-
gress, like Representative Maxine Waters, 
depend on their legislative aides. How might
legislative assistants influence members 
of Congress?

148 CHAPTER 5: THE ORGANIZATION OF CONGRESS

witnesses. Often  the  senator  or  representative has 
not  seen  the  speech  or  the  questions  but  relies  on 
the LA’s judgment.
LAs also keep track of the work taking place on
the  floor  of Congress, as well  as  bills  that  are  in
committee. While routine legislative business goes
on, the  lawmaker may be  in a committee meeting
or talking with voters. When the buzzer rings, sig-
naling time for a vote, lawmakers rush to the floor
of the Senate or House  from  their offices or com-
mittee rooms. They may not know what the vote is
about unless  it  involves  a major bill  that has been
scheduled long in advance. As they walk, they look
for  their  LAs. In  his  book  In  the  Shadow  of the
Dome, former  LA  Mark  Bisnow  describes  the
scene:
“ As the door of the “Senators Only” elevator
opened, their bosses would pour out. . . . If
they did not know what they were voting
on (votes occurred frequently throughout
the day, and it was hard to keep track), . . .
they would glance to the side to see if
someone were waiting. A staffer might
wave and run up for a huddled conference
behind a pillar; or if the senator were in a
hurry . . . he [or she] might simply expect
a quick thumbs-up or thumbs-down 
gesture. ”
—Mark Bisnow, 1990
Caseworkers Some  personal  staff members
are  called  caseworkers because  they  handle  the
many  requests  for help  from people  in  a  lawmak-
er’s  state  or  congressional  district. In  addition  to
their  offices  in Washington, D.C., lawmakers  are
likely to have offices in key cities in their home dis-
trict. Caseworkers usually staff these offices.

Committee Staff
Every  committee  and  subcommittee  in
Congress  has  staff members who work  for
that  committee. The  larger  a  committee  is, the
more  staff people  it will  likely have. The  commit-
tee  chairperson  and  the  senior  minority  par ty
member  of the  committee  are  in  charge  of these
staff members. Committee  staffers  draft  bills,
study  issues, collect  information, plan  committee
hearings, write  memos, and  prepare  committee 

146-155 CH05S5-860053  12/1/04  2:35 AM  Page 149

reports. They  are  largely  responsible  for  the work
involved in making laws.
Some senior committee staff members
are very experienced and are experts  in
the  area  their  committee  covers,
whether  it be  tax policy, foreign  af-
fairs, or  health  care. Laurence
Woodworth, who  spent  32  years
on the staff of the Joint Commit-
tee  on  Internal  Revenue  Taxa-
tion, is  a  good  example  of such
an  exper t. As  the  committee’s
staff director  for  14  years, he was
largely  responsible  for  all  changes
in  the  tax  laws. Later, Wood-
worth  left  the  committee  to
become assistant secretary of
the treasury.
Too  Much  Power? The  people  do  not  elect
congressional  staffers. Yet  they  play  a  key  role  in
lawmaking . Do  they  have  too  much  influence?
Some lawmakers believe they do. Other lawmakers
disagree. They  say  that  the  staff really  collects  in-
formation  and  develops  alternative  courses  of ac-
tion for the lawmakers.

Thomas 
Jefferson

Support Agencies
Several agencies that are part of the  legisla-
tive branch provide services that help Con-
gress  carry  out  its  powers. Some  of the  serv ices
these  agencies  prov ide  are  also  available  to  the
other branches of government and  to private citi-
zens. Congress has created four important support
agencies.
The  Library  of  Congress Congress  created
the Library of Congress in 1800 to “purchase such
books  as  may  be  necessary  for  the  use  of Con-
gress.” Today, it is one of the largest libraries in the
world. This  great  center  of information  contains
more  than  100  million  items, including  books,
journals, music, films, photographs, and  maps.
As  the  administrator  of the  copyright  law, the
copyright  office  in  the  Library  receives  two  free
copies of most published works copyrighted in the 
United States.
The Library has a Congressional Research Ser-
v ice  (CRS)  w ith  hundreds  of employees. Every

Supporting Congress

Congressional Research Congress established
the Library of Congress in 1800, and in 1815 
purchased Thomas Jefferson’s private library of
about 6,000 books. The Main Reading Room is
the center of the greatest research library in the 
United States. Why would members of Congress
require research materials?

year, CRS answers thousands of requests for infor-
mation  from  lawmakers, congressional  staff, and
committees. CRS workers will check out anything,
from  the number of kangaroos  in Australia  to  the
crime  rate  in  urban  areas. Members  of Congress
use  the CRS  to  answer  requests  for  information
from  voters. They  also  use  CRS  for  research  on
matters related to bills before Congress.
Congressional Budget Office (CBO) Con-
gress  established  the CBO in  1974  to  coordinate
the  budget-making work  of Congress, study  the
budget  proposals  put  forward  by  the  president
each  year, and make  cost  projections  of proposed

CHAPTER 5: THE ORGANIZATION OF CONGRESS 149

146-155 CH05S5-860053  12/1/04  2:35 AM  Page 150

new  programs. The  CBO  counterbalances  the
president’s elaborate budget-making organization,
the Office of Management  and Budget. CBO  staff
members  study  economic  trends, keep  track  of
how much  congressional  committees  are  spend-
ing, and prepare a report on the budget each April.
They  also  calculate  how Congress’s  budget  deci-
sions might affect the nation’s economy.
General  Accounting  Office  (GAO) Estab-
lished in 1921, this agency is the nation’s watchdog
over the spending of funds Congress appropriates.
A comptroller general appointed to a 15-year term
directs  the  GAO. The  agency  has  a  professional
staff of about 3,300 people. They review the finan-
cial management  of government  programs  that
Congress  creates, collect  government  debts, settle
claims, and provide legal service.
Many GAO  staff members  answer  requests  for
information about specific programs from lawmak-
ers and congressional committees. GAO staff mem-
bers prepare  reports  on  various  federal programs
for  lawmakers, testify  before  committees, develop
questions for committee hearings, and provide legal
opinions on bills under consideration. Almost one-
third of the GAO’s work now comes from congres-
sional requests for information.
Government  Printing  Office  (GPO) The
Government Printing Office is  the  largest multi-
purpose  printing  plant  in  the world. It  does  the
printing  for  the  entire  federal  government. Every

day  the  GPO  prints  the  Congressional  Record, a
daily  record  of all  the  bills  introduced  in  both
houses and of the speeches and testimony present-
ed  in Congress. Members  of Congress  can make
changes  in  speeches  they  have made  before  they
are  printed  in  the  Record. They  can  even  have
speeches they never actually made in the House or
Senate printed in the Record.
Congressional  staff members  spend  a  good
deal of time preparing speeches for lawmakers be-
cause  those words will be  inserted  in  the Congres-
sional  Record. Thus, when  voters  ask  about  the
lawmaker’s position on a particular issue, the staff
can send a copy of the Record containing a speech
the lawmaker made on that issue to the constituent
making the request.
Another  valuable  publication  of the Govern-
ment  Printing  Office  is  the  Statistical  Abstract 
of the  United  States, updated  and  printed  every
year  since  1878. Published  by  the  Bureau  of the
Census, this  volume  provides  statistical  informa-
tion  about population, government  finances, per-
sonal income, business, agriculture, education, law 
enforcement, national  defense, elections, and
many  other  topics. It  is  an  invaluable  source  of
data used by congressional staff as well as the gen-
eral public.
The  support  agencies provide  a  vital  function
for  Congress. They  have  helped  the  legislative
branch  become  less  dependent  on  the  executive
branch for information. This has helped Congress
regain some of the power it held in earlier years.

S e c t i o n   5   A s s e s s m e n t
S e c t i o n   5   A s s e s s m e n t

Checking for Understanding
1. Main Idea In a graphic organizer like the one
shown, analyze the differences between person-
al staff and committee 
Committee
Personal
staff in Congress.
2. Define personal staff, committee staff, 
administrative assistant, legislative assistant,
caseworker.
3. Identify Library of Congress, Congressional 
Budget Office, General Accounting Office, 
Government Printing Office. 
4. Why did the numbers of congressional staff 
increase rapidly after 1900?

150 CHAPTER 5: THE ORGANIZATION OF CONGRESS

Critical Thinking
5. Demonstrating Reasoned Judgment Why do 
you think the comptroller general who oversees
the General Accounting Office is appointed for 
a 15-year term?

Political Processes Create a political cartoon
that includes a caption about the role of com-
mittee staff in Congress. Take a position on
whether professional staff members have too
much power.

146-155 CH05S5-860053  12/1/04  2:36 AM  Page 151

Making Generalizations
Generalizations set forth a widely applied
principle or rule based on particular facts.
“Florida  is warmer than Michigan” is a
valid generalization based on temperatures
recorded over many years.

Learning the Skill

To make a valid generalization, follow these
steps:
• Identify the subject matter.
• Gather related facts and examples.
• Identify similarities among these facts.
• Use these similarities to form a general
statement about the subject.

Practicing the Skill

Abigail Adams wrote the following letter to
her husband, John, who was attending the Second
Continental Congress in 1775. Read the excerpt
and complete the activity that follows.
“ The reins of government have been so long
slackened that I fear the people will not
quietly submit to those restraints which
are necessary for the peace and security of
the community. If we separate from
Britain, what code of laws will be estab-
lished? How shall we be governed so as to
retain our liberties? Can any government
be free which is administered by general
stated laws? Who shall frame these laws?
Who will give them force and energy? It is
true your resolutions, as a body, have hith-
erto had the force of laws; but will they
continue to have? ”

Abigail 
Adams

Identify each following generalization as valid
or invalid based on the information presented.
1. There are many issues to answer if America
separates from Britain.
2. Some governmental controls are necessary 
in a community.
3. The colonies should adopt the British code 
of laws.
4. The Americans should adopt a new 
constitution.

Application Activity
Application Activity
Over a period of weeks, read the editori-
Over a period of weeks, read the editori-
als in your local newspaper. Then write a 
als in your local newspaper. Then write a 
list of generalizations about the newspaper’s
list of generalizations about the newspaper’s
position on issues such as politics or crime.
position on issues such as politics or crime.
The Glencoe Skillbuilder
Interactive Workbook, Level 2
provides  instruction and practice
in key social studies skills.

151

152-153_TNHS Notebook Congress  12/2/04  2:41 AM  Page 152

G
E
O
R
G
E
 
T
A
M
E
S
/
T
H
E
 
N
E
W
 
Y
O
R
K
 
T
I
M
E
S

K
R
T
/
N
E
W
S
C
O
M

N O T E B O O K

THE JOHNSON TREATMENT
LYNDON B. JOHNSON, SENATE LEADER FROM 1955 TO 1961, HAD A
unique way of persuading colleagues to see his point of view. He
would lean in close, cajole, and sometimes touch the other person
for emphasis—techniques some might refer to as gentle bullying. 

Senator Johnson gives Senator Theodore Francis Green “the treatment.”

SYMBOLS IN THE HOUSE
AND SENATE
THE MACE is made up of 13 ebony rods tied together
with silver string and topped by a globe upon which sits
a silver eagle with outstretched wings. This nearly four-
foot high bundle is placed at the right of the Speaker’s
desk at the beginning of each House session. If a
member becomes unruly, the sergeant at arms has been
known to place the mace in front of that person—or
march up and down the aisle with the mace until people
calm down. 

THE GAVEL is a symbol of authority used by 
both the House and the Senate. The Senate has
a fondness for a certain silver-capped ivory 
gavel that is placed on the vice president’s desk
at the opening of each Senate session. This gavel
has not been used since 1954, when it
started to deteriorate; it has since been
replaced by a replica that was a gift
from the government of India.

C
O
U
R
T
E
S
Y
 
U
.
S
.
 
H
O
U
S
E
 
O
F
 
R
E
P
R
E
S
E
N
T
A
T
I
V
E
S

152

B
E
T
T
M
A
N
N
/
C
O
R
B
I
S

V E R B A T I M
W H A T   P E O P L E   S A I D
“I think it is high time
we remembered that
the Constitution
speaks not only
of the freedom
of speech but
also of trial by jury
instead of trial by
accusation….”
SENATOR MARGARET CHASE
SMITH of Maine, standing up to
Senator Joseph McCarthy during his
anti-Communist crusade in 1950 
“Members of the Congress, the
Constitution makes us not rivals
for power but partners for
progress. We are all trustees for
the American people, custodians
of the American heritage.”
PRESIDENT JOHN F.
KENNEDY, in a 1962 State of
the Union Address
“It is the duty of every member
of this House to act upon his
conscience and his sense of duty.
It is his business to be right,
careless of what may happen to
him in consequence thereof.”
REPRESENTATIVE THOMAS
BRACKETT REED, in an 1884 speech
in the House of Representatives
“Congress is the great
commanding theater of
this nation.”

THOMAS
JEFFERSON, in
an 1808 letter
to William
Wirt, a lawyer
and statesman

B
E
T
T
M
A
N
N
/
C
O
R
B
I
S

152-153_TNHS Notebook Congress  12/1/04  2:40 AM  Page 153

M I L E S T O N E S

U . S .   C O N G R E S S

N U M B E R S
N U M B E R S  
1st In 1968 Shirley
Chisholm became the first
African American woman
elected to Congress.
Four years  later, the
#1##11
New York state
resident was the
first African
American and first
woman to enter the
race for her
party’s nomination
for president of
the United
States. 
1st In 1992
Carol Mosley-
Braun became
the first African
American woman
elected to the
United States
Senate. 
1st Ben Nighthorse
Campbell was the first Native
American to chair the Senate
Indian Affairs Committee.
Judo champ, gold medalist at
the Pan American Games,
jewelry designer, rancher—all
these titles fit this versatile
senator. 
1 The number of votes  in the
Senate by which Texas
squeaked  into the Union  in
1845.  (Other senators were
holding out, thinking Texas
should be carved up  into four
separate states.) 
1 The number of votes by
which the Senate approved
the purchase of Alaska from
Russia for around $7 million.

W
A
R
R
E
N
 
W
I
N
T
E
R
/
C
O
R
B
I
S

153

A
P
 
P
H
O
T
O
/
N
A
S
A

LAUNCHED, 1998. JOHN
GLENN, former Ohio senator and
the first American to orbit Earth,
became the oldest person to
travel in space as a passenger
aboard a NASA space shuttle.
He was 77.

APPOINTED, 1971. TWO 16-
YEAR-OLD GIRLS became the first
females to serve as Senate pages.
In the 1830s, Senator Daniel
Webster had appointed a 9-year-
old boy to run errands and
deliver messages for him—and
the tradition of Senate pages was
born, an all-male tradition that
was not broken for more than
130 years. 

TALKED THE TALK, 1957.
SENATOR STROM THURMOND
of South Carolina set a filibuster 
record by refusing to give up the
Senate floor. He talked for 24
hours and 18 minutes.

I
M
A
G
E
S
.
C
O
M
/
C
O
R
B
I
S

W
I
L
L
I
A
M
 
P
H
I
L
P
O
T
T
/
C
O
R
B
I
S

UNSEATED, 1926. SMITH
BROOKHART became the only
person in U.S. history to be
unseated in the Senate
following a recount of votes.
After a long dispute, the Senate
recounted all 900,000 votes
from a 1924 race in Iowa—and
realized that the wrong man
was currently serving. In 1926 it
awarded the Senate seat to the
true winner, Daniel Steck.

TIE BROKEN,
2001. VICE
PRESIDENT
DICK
CHENEY
used his
powers as
president
of the Senate
(a position
given to every U.S.
vice president) to break a tie
vote. Cheney’s move approved
an amendment to a resolution
that allowed up to $300 billion
to be spent on Medicare
prescription drug coverage. 

146-155 CH05S5-860053  12/1/04  2:39 AM  Page 154

C h a p t e r   5
C h a p t e r   5
Assessment and Activities
Recalling Facts
1. What are the qualifications for members of the
House and Senate?
2. Identify the most powerful committee in the
House of Representatives.
3. List four advantages incumbents have in 
running for office.
4. How do House rules differ from Senate rules?
5. What position in the Senate does the vice
president serve?

Self-Check Quiz Visit the United States Government:
Democracy  in Action Web site at gov.glencoe.com and
click on Chapter 5 –Self-Check Quizzes to prepare  for
the chapter test.

GOVERNMENT

Reviewing Key Terms
Match each term below with one of the following
phrases or terms:
a. House
b. Senate
1. bill
2. majority leader
3. gerrymandering
4. filibuster
5. constituents

c. Both chambers
6. joint committee
7. redistricting
8. reapportionment
9. censure
10. incumbent

Understanding Concepts
1. Political Processes How does the census affect
the reapportionment of the House?
2. Growth of Democracy Why does the Constitu-
tion provide for free and unlimited debate in
Congress?
3. Political Processes How does the majority 
party in each house determine the flow of 
legislation?

Senate

Vice president

30 years old, 9-year U.S. citizen,  legal
resident of the state where elected

Congress

Presiding officer

Qualifications

House of Representatives

Speaker of the House

25 years old, 7-year U.S. citizen,  legal
resident of the state where elected

6 years

Term of office

2 years

100—two from each state

Number of members

435 voting representatives

$154,700

Annual salary

$150,000

Committees
• Needed to manage the thousands of
bills proposed
• Include standing, select,  joint, and
conference committees

Staff
• Personal staff work for  individual
senators and representatives
• Committee staff work for particular
committees

Support Agencies
• Help Congress carry out  its powers
• Some services also available to other
branches and the public

C h a p t e r   5
C h a p t e r   5

Interpreting Political Cartoons Activity
1. What is the subject
of this cartoon?
2. What do the roots
of the tree trunk
symbolize?
3. According to this
cartoon, how 
difficult is it to 
unseat an incum-
bent in Congress?

146-155 CH05S5-860053  12/1/04  2:39 AM  Page 155

Critical Thinking
1. Making Inferences Why are
bills that minority party mem-
bers introduce unlikely to be
reported out of committee?
2. Making Comparisons In a
graphic organizer like the one
below, compare the duties of
a congressional administrative
assistant with those of a leg-
islative assistant.

administrative

legislative

Analyzing Primary
Sources
In 1775, at the request of the 
Continental Congress, John Adams
wrote Thoughts on Government, in
which he detailed what he believed
would be the components of an
ideal form of government. He 
advocated, among other things, 
a bicameral legislature. Read the
excerpt and then answer the 
questions that follow.

“A representation of the people in one assembly being ob-
tained, a question arises whether all the powers of govern-
ment, legislative, executive, and judicial, shall be left in this
body? I think a people cannot be long free, nor ever happy,
whose government is in one Assembly. . . .
[L]et a [distinct] Assembly be constituted, as a mediator
between the two extreme branches of the legislature, that
which represents the people and that which is vested with
the executive power.
Let the Representative Assembly then elect by ballot, from
among themselves or their constituents, or both, a distinct 
Assembly, which for the sake of perspicuity we will call a
Council. It . . . should have a free and independent exercise
of its judgment, and consequently a negative voice in the
legislature.”

1. John Adams advocated a bicameral legislature
with an upper house that would be appointed by
leaders and a lower house that would be elected
by the population. What are the benefits of hav-
ing a legislative body arranged in this manner?

2. Even though Adams believed that one section of
the legislative branch should be appointed, both
houses of the U.S. Congress are directly elected.
What are the benefits of direct elections of repre-
sentatives?

Participating  in
Local Government
The idea of a constitutional
amendment requiring 
term limits for members of
Congress has been debated
in recent years. What are the
arguments for and against a 
constitutional amendment on term limits? What 
is your view? Research this issue and write a letter
to the editor of your local paper expressing your
opinion for or against term limits. Be sure to include
at least three arguments that support your position
in the letter.

CHAPTER 5: THE ORGANIZATION OF CONGRESS 155

