156-166 CH06S1-860053  12/1/04  2:41 AM  Page 156

Influencing Congress Congres-
sional staffs read hundreds of letters
from constituents every day. These 
letters help give direction to decisions
Congress makes in exercising its pow-
ers. In this chapter you will learn what
those powers are and, in addition to
writing letters, how you can affect
those decisions.

Find out more about how
Congress impacts your life
by viewing the Democracy in Action
Chapter 6 video lesson:
The Powers of Congress

★       ★       ★       ★       ★       ★       ★       ★       ★       ★

GOVERNMENT

Chapter Overview Visit the United States
Government: Democracy  in Action Web site
at gov.glencoe.com and click on Chapter
6—Overview to preview chapter  information.

156

156-166 CH06S1-860053  12/1/04  2:41 AM  Page 157

S e c t i o n   1
S e c t i o n   1
Constitutional Powers
Can  a  president  initiate  military  action
Reader’s Guide
without  a  declaration  of war?  The Con-
stitution  is  silent  or  unclear  on  many
questions  concerning  the  powers  of
Congress and the president. Nearly half of the text
of the Constitution  is  contained  in Article  I—an
indication that the Framers intended for Congress
to  play  the  central  role  in  governing  the  nation.
The specific nature of that role has developed and
changed over time.

Key Terms
expressed powers, necessary and proper clause,
implied powers, revenue bill, appropriations bill, 
interstate commerce, impeachment 
Find Out
■ Why are  the money powers granted  to
Congress by  the Founders so  important?
■ How has  the commerce clause enabled
Congress  to apply a  loose  interpretation  to  the
Constitution?
Understanding Concepts
Constitutional Interpretations On what types 
of issues did the Founders restrict congressional
actions with the addition of the Bill of Rights?

Force  Approved  
WASH INGTON ,  D .C . ,   JANUARY 1 9 9 1  
T h e  Ho u s e  a n d  S e n a t e
a v e r t e d   a   p o t e n t i a l
co n s t i t u t i o n a l   c r i s i s   o v e r
t h e
t h e   w a r   p ow e r s   o f
p r e s i d e n t   a n d   C o n g r e s s
t o d a y. T h e   H o u s e   a n d
S e n a t e   e a ch   a d o p t e d   r e s -
a u t h o r i z i n g
o l u t i o n s  
P r e s i d e n t   B u s h   t o   u s e
Ta n k   f r om
f o r c e   a g a i n s t
m i l i t a r y  
P e r s i a n   G u l f   Wa r
I r a q , w h i l e   d e f e a t i n g   a l -
t e r n a t ive   r e s o l u t i on s   t h a t
c a l l e d   f o r   a  d e l ay. L i ke  p r e v i o u s  p r e s i d en t s , Bu s h  h a s
r e f u s e d   t o   a c k n ow l e d g e   C o n g r e s s ’s   a b i l i t y   t o   l im i t
h i s   a c t i o n s   a s   comm a n d e r   i n   ch i e f . In   r e c en t   w e e k s ,
h ow e ve r, h e   h a s   l o b b i e d   to   g a i n   con g r e s s i o n a l   s u p -
p o r t   i n   h i s   con f ro n t a t i o n  w i t h   I r a q .

Constitutional Provisions
The Constitution  describes  the  legislative
powers  of Congress  in Article  I, Section  8,
Clauses  1-18.1 These  expressed powers of Con-
gress are  sometimes  called  the  enumerated  pow-
ers. The  last  clause  (18)  of Section  8  gives
Congress power  to do whatever  is “necessary and
proper” to carry out its other powers. This neces-
sary and proper clause implies that Congress has
powers  beyond  those  expressed  in  the  first  17
clauses. Because  these  implied  powers have  al-
lowed  Congress  to  expand  its  role  to meet  the
needs  of a  grow ing  nation, the “necessary  and
proper  clause” has  often  been  called  the  elastic
clause.
Conflicting  Interpretations Because  of
the  far-reaching  implications  of the  expanding
power  of Congress, the  Supreme  Cour t  has 
often been the site of conflict over what is “nec-
essary  and  proper” legislation. The  first major
conflict was  between  those who  believed  in  a
“strict  construction,” or  interpretation, of the
Constitution and those who believed in a “loose
construction.”
When Congress created the Second Bank of
the United States in 1816, loose constructionists

See the following footnoted materials in the Reference
Handbook:
1. The Constitution, pages 774 –799. 

▲

Washington Monument and the Capitol

CHAPTER 6: DEVELOPMENT OF CONGRESSIONAL POWERS 157

156-166 CH06S1-860053  12/1/04  2:42 AM  Page 158

and strict constructionists engaged in debates. Strict
constructionists, who  believed  that Congress did
not have the power to charter such a bank, support-
ed the state of Maryland when it placed a tax on the
notes of the federal bank. James McCulloch, a teller
at  the  Second Bank’s  branch  in Baltimore, issued
notes on which the tax had not been paid. Maryland
filed  suit  against McCulloch. When Maryland won
the  suit  in  its  own  courts, the  United  States  ap-
pealed. The  Supreme Court  reversed  the decision,
supporting  the  loose  constructionists. Writing  the
majority opinion, Chief Justice John Marshall inter-
preted the necessary and proper clause:
“ The result of the most careful and attentive
consideration bestowed upon this clause is,
that if it does not enlarge, it cannot be con-
strued to restrain the powers of Congress or
to impair the right of the legislature to exer-
cise its best judgment in the selection of
measures to carry into execution the consti-
tutional powers of the government. ”—John Marshall
Powers  Denied The  powers  of Congress,
like those of the other branches of the national gov-
ernment, are limited. One important constitutional
limit on  congressional power  is  the Bill of Rights.

Power of the Purse

In  addition, Ar ticle  I, Section  9, denies  cer tain
powers  to Congress. Congress may  not  suspend
the writ of habeas corpus, a court order to release
a person accused of a crime to court to determine
whether  he  or  she  has  been  legally  detained. An-
other  impor tant  limitation  denies  Congress  the
authority to pass bills of attainder, laws that estab-
lish  guilt  and  punish  people  w ithout  allow ing
them a trial. Congress is also prohibited from pass-
ing  ex  post  facto  laws, laws  that make  crimes  of
acts that were legal when they were committed. Ar-
ticle  I, Section  9, also  denies  several  other  powers
to Congress, among them the power to tax exports.

Legislative Powers
Congress  has  both  legislative  and  nonleg-
islative  powers. Nonlegislative  powers  in-
clude  the  power  to  confirm  or  deny  presidential
appointments. Congress has expanded the domain
of its legislative powers—the power to pass laws—
as  the nation has  grown. The most  significant  ex-
pansion of congressional  legislative power  is  in  its
control over  the economy—taxing, spending, and
regulating commerce.
The  Taxing  and  Spending  Power Some-
times called “the power of the purse,” the power to
levy taxes and provide for the general wel-
fare  of the  United  States  is  among  the
most important powers of Congress. It al-
lows Congress to influence national policy
in  many  areas  because  no  government
agency  can  spend  money  w ithout  con-
gressional  authorization. Congress  may
use taxes for many purposes. For example,
taxes  on  narcotics  are  meant  to  protect
public health.
Article  I, Section  7, says “All  Bills  for
raising  Revenue  shall  originate  in  the
House of Representatives.” Revenue bills,
laws for raising money, start in the House
and  then go  to  the Senate. This provision
was  adopted  at  the Constitutional Con-
vention because the more populous states,
such  as Virginia  and Pennsylvania, insist-
ed  on having  a  greater  voice  in  tax policy
than  the  smaller  states. Because  represen-
tation  in  the  House  was  to  be  based 
on  population, the  Founders  agreed  that 

Government Borrowing Pictured above are a modern
United States savings bond and a banknote issued by
the First Bank of the United States. Why do you think
the Founders specified that all revenue bills should
originate in the House?

158 CHAPTER 6: DEVELOPMENT OF CONGRESSIONAL POWERS

156-166 CH06S1-860053  12/1/04  2:42 AM  Page 159

The Powers of Congress
The Powers of Congress

Selected Expressed Powers

Selected Implied Powers

 MONEY POWERS
Lay and collect taxes  
to provide for the 
defense and general  
welfare of the United 
States (Clause 1); 

Borrow money 
(Clause 2); 

Establish bankruptcy 
laws (Clause 4);

Coin, print, and 
regulate money 
(Clause 5); 

Punish counter feiters 
of American currency  
(Clause 6) 

Lay and collect taxes  
IMPLIES the power to suppor t public schools, 
welfare programs, public housing, etc.

Borrow money
IMPLIES the power to maintain the 
Federal Reser ve Board.

 COMMERCE POWERS
Regulate foreign and 
interstate commerce (Clause 3)

Regulate commerce 
IMPLIES the power to prohibit discrimination 
in restaurants, hotels, and other public 
accommodations.

 MILITARY AND FOREIGN POLICY POWERS
Provide, regulate,
Declare war 
and call into servicea 
(Clause 11); 
Militia, known as
the National Guard     
(Clauses 15 & 16);

   

Raise, suppor t,  
and regulate an
army and navy 
(Clauses 12, 13, 
and 14); 

Punish acts committed 
on international waters 
and against the laws of 
nations (Clause 10)

 OTHER LEGISLATIVE POWERS  
Create lower federal  
Establish laws of  
 
cour ts (Clause 9);
naturalization 
(Clause 4); 

Establish post
of fices and post
roads (Clause 7); 

Grant copyrights 
and patents 
(Clause 8); 

Govern Washington,  
D.C. (Clause 17);

 

Provide for laws  
necessary and
proper for carrying 
out all other listed 
powers (Clause 18)

Raise and suppor t army 
IMPLIES the right to draft people into the 
armed ser vices.

Establish laws of naturalization 
IMPLIES the power to limit the number of 
immigrants to the United States.

Critical Thinking
                             The powers, structure, and procedures of Congress are defined in detail in the 
Constitution, whereas the duties of the president and the Supreme Court are not. How has Congress used 
the commerce clause to prevent discrimination in restaurants, hotels, and other public accommodations?

159

156-166 CH06S1-860053  12/1/04  2:42 AM  Page 160

any  revenue  bills  introduced  in Congress would
originate there.
The  legislative  process  for  appropr iations
bills—proposed  laws  to  authorize  spending
money—is  not  spelled  out  in  the Constitution. It
has  developed  through  usage. Article  I, Section  9,
merely  requires  that “No Money  shall  be  drawn
from  the Treasury, but  in Consequence of Appro-
priations made by Law.” Spending requests gener-
ally  come  from  the  executive branch. Today, most
are presented to Congress in the president’s annu-
al budget proposal.
Over  the  years  Congress  has  used  its  taxing
and  spending  authority  to  expand  its  regulatory
powers. For  example, when Congress  authorizes
money for state or local governments, it frequent-
ly requires that local officials follow specific feder-
al  regulations  as  a  condition  of
the  grant.
Moreover, by levying heavy taxes on products such
as  tobacco  that  it  considers undesirable, Congress
may discourage their use.
Congress  also uses  its money  powers  to  regu-
late  the  economy. For  example, cutting  individual
income  taxes  to  stimulate  the  economy  gives  tax-
payers more money  to  spend. Conversely, Con-
gress  may  try  to  slow  economic  grow th  by
increasing  taxes, leav ing  taxpayers  w ith  smaller
paychecks.

Other Money  Powers In  addition  to  levying
taxes and authorizing that money be spent, Article
I allows Congress to borrow to help pay for the cost
of government. Congress does this in various ways.
The most  common method  is  by  authorizing  the
sale  of government  securities—bonds  or  notes.
When people buy savings bonds, Treasury bills, or
Treasury  notes, they  are  lending  the  government
money. In  return, the  government  promises  to
repay buyers with interest at the end of a specified
period of time—3 months  to 30 years, depending
on the type of security.
Because  it  must  borrow  money  to  meet  its 
operating expenses, the government has a national
debt—the  total amount of money  the government
owes at any given time. This debt, almost $1 trillion
in  1980  and  about  $3.2  trillion  in  1990, reached 
almost $6 trillion in 2000. Although the Constitution
does not restrict government borrowing, since 1917
Congress has  attempted  to  set  an  annual  limit  on
the national debt. In  recent  years, however, it has
raised the ceiling time after time so that the govern-
ment could borrow more money to pay its bills.
As part of Congress’s money powers, the Con-
stitution  gives  the  legislative  branch  the power  to
coin money  and  to  regulate  its  value. All  currency
the federal government issues is legal tender, mean-
ing that it must be accepted as payment. In addition,

Minimum Wage Laws
W hat pay should you expect when you look
for a job? Generally, employers must pay a
standard minimum wage set by federal
law. However, many exceptions exist. 
If you are a student working for a retail busi-
ness, in an agricultural job, or for a school’s voca-
tional education program, your employer is not
required to pay minimum wage. In addition, employ-
ers can pay all workers under age 20 less than min-
imum wage for their first 90 days of employment.
Other exceptions include workers who receive tips
and seasonal employees. Meals your employer pro-
vides, or expenses your employer pays on your be-
half, can also reduce your wage rate.
Finally, federal law allows states to pass laws

160

that can be more
generous than the
minimum wage.
Your local employ-
ment services 
office can provide
more information
about wage laws 
in your state. 

Earning a wage

articipating
articipating
I N   G O V E R N M E N T  
I N   G O V E R N M E N T  

A C T I V I T Y
A C T I V I T Y

Conduct Research How does  the minimum wage
affect employment  in your community? Gather
information and  report your  findings  in a  letter  to
your  local newspaper.

156-166 CH06S1-860053  12/1/04  2:43 AM  Page 161

Expanding Interstate Commerce

Congress has  the power  to punish
counterfeiters—people who print
postage  stamps, paper  money,
or government securities illegally—
and  to  establish  a  system  of stan-
dard weights and measures.
The money powers of Congress
also  include  the  authority  to make
laws  concerning  bankruptcy—
legal proceedings to administer the
assets  of a  person  or  business  that
cannot  pay  its  debts. Despite  this
authority, for more than a century
Congress generally left bankruptcy
matters to the states. In 1898 Con-
gress  passed  the  bankruptcy  law
that, w ith  later  amendments, re-
mains  in  force  today. Almost  all
bankruptcy cases are heard  in  fed-
eral courts.
The  Commerce  Power Arti-
cle  I, Section  8, Clause  3,1 the  so-
called  commerce  clause  of the
Constitution, authorizes Congress
to  regulate  foreign  commerce  and
interstate  commerce, or  commerce  among  the
states. In  this  clause  the  Founders  provided what
has  become  one  of the most  sweeping  powers  of
government. The  Supreme Court  has  promoted
the expansion of this power by consistently ruling
that the meaning of commerce—whether interna-
tional  or  interstate—far  exceeds  the mere  buying
and selling of goods and services.

Gibbons v. Ogden The landmark decision on
this subject came in Gibbons v. Ogden (1824). The
state of New York had  granted Robert Fulton  and
Robert  Livingston  the  exclusive  right  to  operate
steamboats  on New York waters. This monopoly
granted Aaron Ogden a permit for steamboat trav-
el across the Hudson River between New York and
New Jersey. Thomas Gibbons, operating a compet-
ing  line, had  a  coasting  license  from  the  federal

See the following footnoted materials in the Reference Handbook:
1. The Constitution, pages 774 –799. 

Constitutional Interpretations The ruling in Gibbons v. Ogden
opened up trade between New York and New Jersey. Within a short
time dozens of steamboats ferried passengers and freight across
the Hudson River. How did this Supreme Court ruling affect
states’ control of economic activities?

government. Ogden  sued Gibbons, and  the  state 
of New York held that Gibbons could not sail in its
waters. Gibbons appealed, claiming that Congress,
not  the state of New York, had  the power  to regu-
late  commerce. The  argument  for  state  control 
was  that  commerce  involved  only  products.
The Court, however, ruled  that  all  forms  of busi-
ness  across  state  lines  come  under  the  commerce
clause.
Over the years the Court has expanded its def-
inition of commerce to give Congress even greater
power. Any widespread activity that can possibly be
considered interstate commerce is subject to feder-
al  control. The  long  list  of such  activities  includes
broadcasting, banking  and  finance, and  air  and
water pollution.
Congress  has  used  its  power  over  interstate
commerce  to  set  policy  in many  other  areas, too.
For example, Congress requires that businesses en-
gaged  in  interstate commerce pay their employees
a minimum  wage. Almost  all  businesses  deal  in
some  way  w ith  someone  in  another  state. This
power  enables Congress  to  regulate working  con-
ditions across the nation.

CHAPTER 6: DEVELOPMENT OF CONGRESSIONAL POWERS 161

156-166 CH06S1-860053  12/1/04  2:43 AM  Page 162

Heart of Atlanta Motel v. United States
One  of the  most  significant  applications  of the
commerce clause has been in the area of civil rights.
In 1964 Congress used  its power  to  regulate  inter-
state  commerce  to  pass  the  landmark Civil Rights
Act. This law prohibited discrimination in places of
public accommodation such as restaurants, hotels,
and motels. It also prohibited job discrimination.
A Georgia motel owner  immediately  attacked
the  law, claiming  that  the motel was  a  local  busi-
ness. It was  therefore  not  part  of interstate  com-
merce, and the law should not apply. On appeal to
the Supreme Court, the justices disagreed. In Heart
of Atlanta Motel v. United States (1964),1 the Court
noted that public places of accommodation served
interstate  travelers and  sold  food  that had crossed
state lines.
“We, therefore, conclude that the action of
Congress in the adoption of the Act as ap-
plied here to a motel which concededly
serves interstate travelers is within the
power granted it by the Commerce Clause
of the Constitution, as interpreted by this
Court for 140 years. ”
—Justice Tom C. Clark, 1964

This  decision  indicated  that  the  Cour t  was
willing  to  allow Congress  broad  commerce  pow-
ers, even  in  areas  that were  not  economic. Since
then the commerce power has even supported fed-
eral criminal laws aimed at racketeering and arson.
Foreign Policy Powers Congress has impor-
tant powers  in  the  areas of foreign policy  and na-
tional defense. Chief among these are the power to
approve  treaties, to  declare  war, to  create  and
maintain an army and navy, to make rules govern-
ing  land  and  naval  forces, and  to  regulate  foreign
commerce.
Congress  shares  foreign  policy  and  national
defense responsibilities with the president. Histor-
ically  it  generally  has  submitted  to  presidential
leadership in this area. Although Congress has de-
clared war only 5 times, the president, as comman-
der  in  chief, has  used  military  force  in  other
nations on more than 200 occasions. Most signifi-
cant of these were  the Korean War (1950  to 1953)
and  the Vietnam War  (1964  to  1973). Both  con-
flicts were fought without declarations of war.

See the following footnoted materials in the Reference Handbook:
1. Heart of Atlanta Motel v. United States case summary, 
page 759. 

Establishing Federal Property

Public Policy The
Grand Canyon of the
Yellowstone by Thomas
Moran This painting
dramatized the magnif-
icence of the West and
inspired Congress to
declare Yellowstone a
national park in 1872.
Analyze and evaluate
the consequences of
this decision on the
physical environment
of the region. To
what extent might
privatization improve
or complicate the
operation of places
such as Yellow-
stone?

162 CHAPTER 6: DEVELOPMENT OF CONGRESSIONAL POWERS

156-166 CH06S1-860053  12/1/04  2:43 AM  Page 163

After the Vietnam War, Congress acted
to reassert its foreign policy powers. Con-
gress held that the Constitution never in-
tended  for  the  president  to  have  the
power  to  involve  the  nation  in  unde-
clared  wars. Therefore, in  1973, over
President Nixon’s  veto, Congress passed
the War Powers Act. This law forbids the
president to commit American forces to
combat for more than 60 days without
congressional notification within
48  hours. Every  president  since 
the  act’s  passage  has  protested 
its  constitutionality. During  this
period  presidents  used  military
force  in  Cambodia  (1975),
Iran
(1980), Lebanon  (1982), Grenada
(1983), Libya  (1986), the  Persian  Gulf
(1987), Panama  (1989), Iraq  (1991–2004),
Somalia  (1993), Haiti  (1994), the Balkans  (1995),
Yugoslavia  (1999), and Afghanistan  (2001–2004).
Most of these were quick strikes with little warning.
Nevertheless, in most  cases  the president notified
Congress of the action.
Providing  for  the  Nation’s  Growth The
Constitution also grants Congress power over nat-
uralization, the  process  by which  immigrants  to
the United  States may  become  citizens. In  addi-
tion, Article  IV, Section  3, authorizes Congress  to
admit  new  states  and  pass  laws  needed  to  govern
any  territories. Today, American  territories  such
as Guam, the  Virgin  Islands, and  Wake  Island
fall under  this  prov ision. Finally, both  Ar ticle  I
and Article  IV  empower Congress  to  pass  laws  to
govern federal property. The Founders envisioned
such  property  as military  bases  and  government
buildings. Today, however, these  provisions  estab-
lish  federal  authority over national parks, historic
sites, and public lands.
Other  Legislative  Powers Article  I, Section
8,1 gives Congress  the  power  to  grant  copyrights
and  patents. A  copyright is  the  exclusive  right  to
publish and sell a literary, musical, or artistic work
for  a  specified  period  of time. Under  the  present
law, this period is the lifetime of the creator plus 50

See the following footnoted materials in the Reference Handbook:
1. The Constitution, pages 774 –799. 

North Korean flag

Presidents Truman, Kennedy, 
Johnson, and Nixon challenged
congressional powers by expand-
ing U.S. involvement in the Korean
and Vietnam Wars without a 
congressional declaration of war.

Vietnam
War hat

years. A patent is the exclusive right of an inventor
to manufacture, use, and  sell  his  or  her  invention
for  a  specific  period, currently  17  years  (after
which a patent may be renewed).
Article  I, Section  8, also  grants Congress  the
power to establish a post office and federal courts.
Congress has also used its postal power to combat
criminal activity; using  the mail  for any  illegal act
is a federal crime.

Non-legislative Powers
In  carry ing  out  their  legislative  powers,
both the House and the Senate perform the
same  basic  tasks—considering , amending , and
voting  on  bills. While most  non-legislative  func-
tions of Congress require cooperation between the
houses, each house usually plays a different role in
exercising these powers.
The  Power  to  Choose  a  President The
Constitution  requires  a  joint  session  of Congress 
to  count  the Electoral College  votes. If no  candi-
date  for  president  has  a majority  of the  electoral
votes, the House  chooses  the  president  from  the
three  candidates  w ith  the  most  electoral  votes.
Each  state’s  House  delegation  has  one  vote.
The  Senate, by  majority  vote, chooses  the  v ice
president  from  the  two  candidates with  the most

CHAPTER 6: DEVELOPMENT OF CONGRESSIONAL POWERS 163

156-166 CH06S1-860053  12/1/04  2:43 AM  Page 164

Impeached!

Acquitted President 
Clinton, like Andrew 
Johnson, was found not 
guilty of “high Crimes and 
Misdemeanors.”  What body 
conducts an impeachment trial of a president?

Andrew Johnson
and impeachment ticket

The Removal Power The Constitu-
tion  grants  Congress  the  power  to 
remove  any  federal  official  from  office.
The House of Representatives has exclu-
sive power over impeachment, a formal
accusation of misconduct in office.
If a majority  of the House  votes  to
impeach  a  public  official, the  Senate
conducts  the  trial. A  two-thirds  vote  of
those  Senators  present  is  required  for
conv iction  and  removal. When  the
impeachment proceedings involve a
president, the Chief Justice  of the
United States presides.
Since 1789 the Senate has tried
several  federal  judges, a  Supreme
Cour t  justice, a  cabinet  secretary,
and  two  presidents  on  impeachment
charges. Many  of these  cases  ended 
in  conv iction. However, the  Senate 
acquitted  President Andrew  Johnson
by  only  one  vote  in  1868. President
Richard  Nixon  would  have  been  the
second  president  impeached  had  he 
not resigned in 1974.
In  1998  the House  Judiciary Com-
mittee  recommended  the  impeachment
of President  Bill  Clinton. By  narrow
margins, the House  passed  two  articles
of impeachment against the president—
for  perjury  in  a  grand  jury  testimony  and  for  ob-
struction of justice.
The House delivered these two charges against
the president to the Senate, and a trial began in Jan-
uary 1999. Article II, Section 4, of the Constitution
says  that  a  president  (or  other  civil  officer  of the
United States) “shall be removed from office upon
impeachment  for  and  Conv iction  of, Treason,
Bribery, or other high Crimes and Misdemeanors.”
During  the  Senate  trial, Senators  considered
whether  the  charges  against  President Clinton, if
proven, were  serious  enough  to warrant  removal
from office. In February 1999 the Senate acquitted
the  president  by  failing  to  obtain  the  two-thirds
majority necessary to convict on either charge.
The Confirmation Power The Senate has the
power  to  approve  presidential  appointments  of
federal  officials. Because most  of these  appoint-
ments involve the promotions of military officers,

electoral votes. It is, therefore, possible that the vice
president could be from a different party than the
president. Only two times in American history has
no  presidential  candidate  captured  a majority  of
the  electoral  votes. In  1800  the  House  elected
Thomas  Jefferson over Aaron Burr, and  in 1824  it
chose John Quincy Adams over Andrew Jackson.
The  Twentieth and  Twenty-fifth  Amend-
ments1 give Congress the power to settle problems
arising  from  the  death  of elected  candidates  and
from  presidential  incapacity  or  resignation. The
Twenty-fifth Amendment  provides  that when  the
office of vice president becomes vacant, the presi-
dent appoints a replacement. Both houses of Con-
gress must  confirm  the  appointment. During  the
1970s, two vice presidents gained office under this
amendment.

See the following footnoted materials in the Reference Handbook:
1. The Constitution, pages 774 –799. 

164 CHAPTER 6: DEVELOPMENT OF CONGRESSIONAL POWERS

156-166 CH06S1-860053  12/1/04  2:44 AM  Page 165

Senate action is usually only a formality. Each year,
however, the  Senate  looks more  closely  at  several
hundred  nominations  to  cabinet  and  subcabinet
positions, regulatory  agencies, major  diplomatic
and military posts, and the federal judiciary. Nom-
inees  to  the  Supreme  Cour t  receive  the  most
scrutiny. The Senate has rejected about 20 percent
of Court nominations.
The Ratification Power Article II, Section 2,
of the Constitution  gives  the  Senate  the  exclusive
power  to  ratify  treaties  between  the United  States
and other nations. To  ratify a  treaty, two-thirds of
the senators present must vote for it. This power is
one of the key ways in which Congress helps shape
foreign policy.
In  1980  many  senators  opposed  the  second
Strategic Arms  Limitation  Talks  (SALT  II)  Treaty
between  the United  States  and  the  Soviet Union.
This  opposition  prevented  a  vote, and  the  treaty
was not  ratified. With  a  few  exceptions Senate  ac-
tion  on  treaties  has  not  been  a  major  factor  in
American  foreign  policy. Nevertheless, in  recent
years presidents have often bypassed the treaty rat-
ification  process  by  negotiating  executive  agree-
ments with other heads of state. These agreements
do not require Senate approval.
The  Amendment  Power Congress  shares
w ith  state  legislatures  the  power  to  propose

amendments. Amendments may be proposed by a
two-thirds vote of both houses or by a convention
called by the legislatures of two-thirds of the states.
Such  a  convention  has  never  been  called. This
method, however, raises  important  constitutional
questions. One  significant  question  is whether  a
constitutional  convention  called  to  propose  a 
cer tain  amendment  may  then  propose  amend-
ments on topics other than those contained in the
states’ original  petitions. Some  people  fear  that
delegates might  propose  revisions  of long-estab-
lished  constitutional  prov isions. Congress  has 
considered, but not acted on, measures that would
limit constitutional conventions to the  issues pro-
posed in state petitions to Congress. Congress also
has the power to determine whether state conven-
tions  or  state  legislatures  w ill  ratify  a  proposed
amendment.
To date, all of the  constitutional  amendments
added  to  the  Constitution  have  star ted  in  Con-
gress. The  states  have  approved  27  proposed
amendments and have failed to ratify only 6. Con-
gress  has  required  all  amendments—except  the
Twenty-first Amendment  (1933), which  repealed
the Eighteenth Amendment on Prohibition—to be
ratified  by  state  legislatures. Advocates  of the
Twenty-first  Amendment  believed  they  would
have better  support  in  conventions  than  state  leg-
islatures, because  many  state  legislatures  were
dominated by “Drys,” supporters of Prohibition.

S e c t i o n   1   A s s e s s m e n t
S e c t i o n   1   R e v i e w
S e c t i o n   1   A s s e s s m e n t
S e c t i o n   1   R e v i e w

Checking for Understanding
1. Main Idea In a chart like the one below, list two
or more examples of powers the Constitution
expresses, implies, and denies to Congress.
Denied
Implied
Expressed

2. Define expressed powers, necessary and proper
clause, implied powers, revenue bill, appropria-
tions bill, interstate commerce, impeachment. 
3. Identify Twentieth Amendment, Twenty-fifth
Amendment.
4. State the foreign policy powers of Congress.
5. Describe the process by which Congress may 
remove a member of the executive or judicial
branch from office.

Critical Thinking
6. Drawing Conclusions Do you think Gibbons v.
Ogden provided a basis for the Supreme Court’s
position in Heart of Atlanta Motel v. United
States that a hotel is a part of interstate
commerce? Explain.

Constitutional Interpretations Research 
legislation that Congress passed in a recent
session. Identify any bills you believe were
based on the power to regulate interstate 
commerce. Draw a political cartoon supporting
or criticizing the legislation.

CHAPTER 6: DEVELOPMENT OF CONGRESSIONAL POWERS 165

156-166 CH06S1-860053  12/1/04  2:44 AM  Page 166

CASES TO DEBATE

Flood v. Kuhn
et al., 1972 
With teams from New York
to California, professional
baseball is not only a sport
but also a business engaged in interstate commerce. Is baseball subject to
federal antitrust laws like other businesses? Do baseball players have the
right to act as free agents and make their own contracts with the team that
will pay the most? The case of Flood v. Kuhn dealt with these questions.

Curt Flood

Background of the Case
In twelve seasons with the St. Louis Cardinals
(1958 to 1969) Curt Flood was a three-time All-
Star, played in three World Series, and won seven
Golden Glove awards. In 1969, without consulting
him, St. Louis traded Flood to the Philadelphia
Phillies. He complained to the baseball commis-
sioner that he had earned the right to be treated as
more than a piece of property. Flood asked that he
be allowed to act as a free agent. 
The commissioner refused, stating that base-
ball’s reserve clause meant that each player was
tied indefinitely to one club, unless that club want-
ed to trade the player. This rule saved the owners
money because it reduced competition by prevent-
ing the players from selling their services to
whichever club would pay them the most.
Flood sat out the 1970 season and took his
case to the courts. Two lower courts ruled in favor

of the owners. Supported by the players’ union,
Flood appealed. In 1972 the case came to the
Supreme Court. By then Curt Flood had left baseball
and never played again.

The Constitutional Issue
Under its power to regulate interstate com-
merce, Congress passed the Sherman Antitrust Act
in 1890 as a way to prevent the growth of business
monopolies that prevented competition. 
In 1922 in Federal Baseball Club v. National
League the Court stated that baseball involved in-
terstate commerce but was not the type of busi-
ness that the antitrust laws were intended to cover.
Some 30 years later in Toolson v. New York 
Yankees the Court refused to overrule its earlier de-
cision. Furthermore, it stated that Congress had al-
lowed baseball to develop exempt from antitrust
laws rather than subject to them. 

Debating the Case
Debating the Case

Questions to Consider
1. Where did Congress get the authority to create
antitrust laws?
2. What could be the consequences for baseball if
the Court ruled in favor of Curt Flood of the St.
Louis Cardinals?
3. Should the Supreme Court overrule its own
precedents and declare baseball subject to an-
titrust laws, or should the Court leave the choice
to Congress?

You Be the Judge
In fighting the reserve clause, Curt Flood chal-
lenged baseball’s exemption from the antitrust laws
passed by Congress. The reserve clause was clearly
a violation of the antitrust laws because it restricted
the players’ ability to bargain with clubs for their
services and thus helped the baseball owners con-
trol competition. To rule in Curt Flood’s favor the
Court would have to overturn its ruling in the earlier
cases. How would you rule?

166

167-171 CH06S2-860053  12/1/04  2:44 AM  Page 167

S e c t i o n   2
S e c t i o n   2
Investigations and Oversight
Reader’s Guide Most congressional powers fall into two
of four categories. They are either leg-
Key Terms
islative  or  nonlegislative  powers, and
they  are  either  expressed  powers  or
subpoena, perjury, contempt, immunity, legislative
implied powers. Over the years, however, Congress
veto
has  developed  additional  powers  inherent  in  gov-
Find Out
erning  but  not  mentioned  in  the  Constitution.
■ In what ways are a witness’s rights in a con-
These powers are the power to  investigate and the
gressional investigation similar to and different
power of legislative oversight.
from a witness’s rights in a court?
■ By what methods does Congress exercise its
power of legislative oversight?
Understanding Concepts
Checks and Balances How does the
power of Congress to oversee the carrying
out of laws serve as a check on the executive
branch?

Crans ton  Targe ted  
WASH INGTON ,  D .C . ,   F EBRUARY 1 9 9 1
S en a to r  A l an  C r an s ton  i s
t h e   s o l e   t a r g e t   o f a
l o n g - d e l ay e d   S e n a t e   E t h i c s
C omm i t t e e   r e p o r t   j u s t   r e -
l e a s e d . Fo u r   o t h e r   s en a to r s
r e l a t i v e l y   u n -
e s c a p e d  
s c a t h e d . T h e   c omm i t t e e
A   d e f u n c t   S & L
f o u n d   t h a t   t h e   7 6 - y e a r- o l d
f r om   C a l i f o r n i a
s e n a t o r  
h a d   e n g a g e d   i n   “ im p e rm i s s i b l e   con d u c t .” T h e   f i n d -
i n g s  f o l l ow e d  a  1 4 -m o n t h  i nve s t i g a t i o n  i n to  d e a l i n g s
b e tw e e n  a   s av i n g s  a n d   l o a n  ( S& L )  e xe c u t ive , C h a r l e s
Ke a t i n g , a n d  5  m em b e r s  o f t h e  Un i t e d  S t a t e s  S e n a t e .
A l l   5   h a d   h e l p e d   Ke a t i n g   a n d   a c c e p t e d   c am p a i g n
c o n t r i b u t i o n s   f rom   h im   a t   t h e   s am e   t im e . Ke a t i n g
n e e d e d   p ro t e c t i o n   f rom   t h e   i nve s t i g a t i o n s   o f f e d e r a l
r e g u l a to r s   d u r in g   t h e   S& L   c r i s i s .

The Power to Investigate
The  Founders  neither  granted  nor  denied
Congress  the  power  to  conduct  investiga-
tions. Nevertheless, in  1792, after Native Ameri-
cans  soundly  defeated  the  United  States  Army,
Congress launched an investigation of the military.
This power has played an important role in Amer-
ican politics ever since.
The  Investigation  Process A  standing
committee or a select committee may conduct in-
vestigations. Investigations may  last  for  several
days  or  go  on  for months. The  committee’s  staff
members may  travel  around  the  country  collect-
ing evidence and scheduling witnesses. Dozens of
w itnesses  may  be  called  to  testify, sometimes
under oath, at committee hearings.
Congressional investigations occur for many
reasons. Most get little notice, but a few have be-
come media  events. In  1998  the  Senate  Finance
Committee  opened  hearings  into  the  collection
methods  of the  Internal  Revenue  Service. Wit-
nesses’ televised testimony about the strong-arm
tactics used by the agency led to a 97 to 0 Senate
vote to reform the IRS. In the 1990s Congress in-
vestigated allegations against its own members.
In  1995  alone, 20  senators  and  representa-
tives  faced  complaints  that  went  to  congres-
sional  ethics  panels. While  many  of these
complaints were  politically motivated, several
members were indicted, two Democratic mem-
bers  of the House  were  conv icted  of crimes,

CHAPTER 6: DEVELOPMENT OF CONGRESSIONAL POWERS 167

167-171 CH06S2-860053  12/1/04  2:45 AM  Page 168

Congressional Investigations

▲

In 1973, the Senate created the
Select Committee on Presidential
Campaign Activities to investigate
events surrounding the Watergate
break-in. This investigation eventu-
ally led to calls for President
Richard Nixon’s impeachment and
his resignation.

▲

In the early 1950s, Senator Joseph
McCarthy’s committee investigated
claims that Communists had infil-
trated educational institutions and
high levels of government. 

Checks and Balances
How does Congress’s
power to investigate
strengthen the system 
of checks and balances?

and a Republican senator resigned to avoid
being  expelled. At  the  same  time, a  Senate
committee  probed  into  inquiries  about  Presi-
dent Clinton’s Whitewater  land  investments  and
links  to  a  failed  sav ings  and  loan  company  in
Arkansas when he was the state’s governor.
Investigations  may  have  a  variety  of conse-
quences. In most  circumstances  they  lead  to  new
legislation  to  deal  w ith  a  problem, changes  in  a
government program, or removal of officials from
office. Sometimes, however, they damage the repu-
tations of innocent people.
Congressional  Powers  and  Witness
Rights Although  congressional  investigations
are  not  trials, Congress  has  several  powers  that
help committees collect evidence. Like courts, con-
gressional committees have the power to subpoena
witnesses. A subpoena is a legal order that a person
appear or produce requested documents. Congress
makes great use of this power.
Also like courts, congressional committees can
require witnesses  to  testify  under  oath. Witnesses
who do not tell the truth can be criminally prose-
cuted for perjury, or lying under oath. In addition,

committees  may  punish  those
who  refuse  to  testify  or  otherwise
will not cooperate by holding them in
contempt, or willful  obstruction, of Con-
gress. Persons found in contempt of Congress may
be arrested and jailed. While the Constitution does
not  grant  Congress  this  power, cour t  decisions
have generally upheld it.
Until recent years, witnesses called to testify in
person  before  a  congressional  committee  had  few
rights. In  1948, for  example, the  chairperson  of a
House  committee  told  one  hapless witness: “The
rights  you  have  are  the  rights  given  you  by  this
committee. We  w ill  determine  what  rights  you
have  and what  rights  you  do  not  have  before  the
committee.”
Today this situation has changed, and witness-
es have  important rights when appearing before a
congressional  committee. In  Watkins  v. United
States  (1957),1 the  Supreme  Cour t  ruled  that
Congress must  respect w itnesses’ constitutional
rights just as a court does. The Court stated:

See the following footnoted materials in the Reference Handbook:
1. Watkins v. United States case summary, page 767. 

168 CHAPTER 6: DEVELOPMENT OF CONGRESSIONAL POWERS

167-171 CH06S2-860053  12/1/04  2:45 AM  Page 169

“Witnesses cannot be compelled to give 
evidence against themselves. They cannot
be subjected to unreasonable search and
seizure. Nor can the 1st Amendment free-
doms of speech, press, religion, or political
belief and association be abridged. ”
—Chief Justice Earl Warren, 1957
One way  that  congressional  committees  have
sidestepped  this  requirement  is  by  granting 
immunity  to  w itnesses. Immunity is  freedom
from  prosecution  for witnesses whose  testimony
ties  them  to  illegal  acts. Of course, the  Fifth
Amendment states that people cannot be forced to
testify  against  themselves. Witnesses  who  are
granted immunity, however, can be required to tes-
tify  about  illegal  activ ities  in which  they  are  in-
volved. Those who refuse may be held in contempt
and jailed.
A 1987 case illustrates the principle of immuni-
ty. A Senate committee investigated charges against
officials  in  the Reagan  administration. They were
charged  with  selling  arms  to  Iran  and  using  the
money to finance a guerrilla war in Nicaragua. The
committee  granted  immunity  to  Colonel  Oliver
North, an employee of the president’s National Se-
curity Council, and compelled him to testify. North
implicated  the president’s national  security  adviser
and others. North was tried and convicted. His sen-
tence  was  later  thrown  out  and  his  conviction 
was  overturned  on  appeal, because  evidence used
against him was uncovered as a result of his protect-
ed congressional testimony.

Legislative Oversight
Many, if not most, congressional  investiga-
tions are related to another power that Con-
gress  has  developed. The  power  of legislative
oversight involves  a  continuing  review  of how  ef-
fectively  the  executive  branch  carries  out  the  laws
Congress  passes. Under  its  commerce  power  and
the necessary and proper clause Congress has creat-
ed  a  huge  bureaucracy. In  exercising  its oversight
power, congressional  committees keep watch over
these agencies of the executive branch.
The  Practice  of  Legislative  Oversight
Legislative oversight is a good example of the consti-
tutional principle of checks  and balances. Congress

makes the laws. The job of the executive branch is to
carry  them  out. In  doing  so, the  executive  branch
has the power to decide what legislation means and
how it should be put into effect. Through its power
of legislative oversight, Congress can check on how
the executive branch is administering the law.
Congress has defined its oversight functions in
several  laws. The  Legislative  Reorganization Act 
of 1946  calls  for Congress  to  exercise “continuous
watchfulness” over  executive  agencies. In  the  Leg-
islative  Reorganization  Act  of 1970, Congress
states, “Each  standing committee  shall  review and
study, on  a  continuing  basis, the  application, ad-
ministration, and execution” of laws in areas of its
responsibility.

Senate Committee Investigations

Government Under Scrutiny Senate 
Governmental Affairs Committee chairman 
Fred Thompson (second from right) meets with 
committee members in 1997 to investigate
fund-raising practices by the Democratic 
National Committee. The committee hearings
focused on how American politics and policies
may have been inappropriately influenced.
What investigative powers are assigned 
to Congress in the Constitution?

CHAPTER 6: DEVELOPMENT OF CONGRESSIONAL POWERS 169

167-171 CH06S2-860053  12/1/04  2:45 AM  Page 170

Limits  on  Legislative  Oversight In  prac-
tice, however, lawmakers exercise the power of leg-
islative  oversight  in  an  inconsistent  way. Vice
President Hubert Humphrey  once  said  that Con-
gress “sometimes  gets  in  the  habit  of ‘pass  it  and
forget it’ lawmaking.” Very few congressional com-
mittees review the actions of the executive branch
on a regular basis especially if the president and the
majority  of Congress  are  the  same  party. Instead,
legislative  oversight  usually  occurs  in  bits  and
pieces  as    congressional  staffs  and  committees  go
about their business.
There are  several reasons  that  legislative over-
sight is not carried out consistently. First, lawmak-
ers  do  not  have  enough  staff, time, or money  to
keep track of everything going on in the executive
branch. It simply is not possible for Congress to ef-
fectively monitor the routine activities of the many
executive agencies.
Second, lawmakers  know  there  are  not many
votes  to  be  gained  from most  oversight  activities.
Voters and the news media seldom are interested in
oversight activities unless an investigation turns up
a scandal or an unusual problem. As one lawmaker

aptly put it, “Where there is publicity to be gained,
there is oversight to be had.”
Third, the  language  of some  laws  is  so  vague
that  it  is  very  difficult  to  judge  exactly what  they
mean. Without  clear  objectives, lawmakers  have
little basis for judging whether or not the executive
branch is carrying out the law’s intent.
Finally, committees  sometimes  come  to  favor
the  federal  agencies  they  are  supposed  to  oversee.
Lawmakers and the officials who work for a feder-
al agency often become well acquainted, spending
long  hours working  together. In  such  cases  there
exists a danger that a committee may not engage in
careful, critical oversight of an agency.
Congressional  Limits  on  Executive 
Activities Congress  exercises  its  oversight
power  in several ways. One way  is  for Congress to
require executive agencies to submit reports to Con-
gress on their activities. The 1946 Employment Act,
for example, requires the president to send Congress
an annual report on the nation’s economy. During
a recent term of Congress, federal agencies submit-
ted more than 1,000 such reports to Capitol Hill.

Making a Difference Although Robin Deykes loved
to fly, she was nearly
grounded in 1995 when the
Making a Difference
Federal Aviation Administration
(FAA) proposed a new set of rules.
Robin Deykes
The rules stated that all pilots fly-
ing in the United States must
speak and understand spoken
English. Robin, who is deaf, said,
“They might as well have said NO
DEAF PILOTS ALLOWED.” Prior to
the new rules, deaf people could
become pilots in the United
States if they used airports that
did not require
radio contact.
When Robin
found out about the
FAA’s change in rules,
she tracked down John
Lynch at the FAA who had
been involved in develop-
ing them. She told him that

Aircraft

the new rules would prevent her
and other deaf and hearing im-
paired pilots from flying. “The pro-
posed rules were really the result
of a misunderstanding. I thought
that most deaf people could
speak and read lips,” Lynch said.
“Robin made me realize that was
not always the case.” Lynch said
the ruling was not intended to
keep deaf people from flying.
Robin’s efforts helped con-
vince the FAA to change its rules.
The rules now state that pilots
who are deaf or hearing impaired
can continue to fly into airports
where no radio contact is re-
quired. They also state that if fu-
ture technology enables deaf and
hearing impaired people to com-
municate by radio, they will also
be permitted to fly into radio-con-
trolled airports.

170 CHAPTER 6: DEVELOPMENT OF CONGRESSIONAL POWERS

167-171 CH06S2-860053  12/1/04  2:45 AM  Page 171

A  second  oversight  technique  is  for 
lawmakers to ask one of the congressional sup-
port  agencies, such  as  the General Accounting
Office  (GAO), to  study  an  executive  agency’s
work. The GAO monitors the finances of federal
agencies  to make  sure  public money  has  been
spent appropriately and legally.
The power of Congress to appropriate money
provides another means of oversight. Each year
Congress reviews the budgets of all agencies in the
executive  branch. This  review  allows Congress
to  shape public policy by  expanding, reducing,
or eliminating certain programs.
For years Congress used  the  legislative veto,
in which Congress wrote provisions  into  some
laws  that  allowed  it  to  review  and  cancel 
actions of the executive agencies that carried out
those laws. This gave Congress authority over subor-
dinates of the president. In 1983 the Supreme Court
ruled  in  Immigration  and Naturalization  Service v.
Chadha that the veto was unconstitutional because it
violated the principle of separation of powers.
Independent Counsel In 1978 Congress passed
the Ethics in Government Act in an attempt to ensure
that allegations of wrongdoing by high government
officials would  receive  fair  investigation. In certain
cases, Congress could demand the appointment of
a  special  prosecutor  called  the  independent  coun-
sel. The  law  generated 20  investigations  and  led  to
President Clinton’s  impeachment. Support  for  the
law  eroded, however, as many  people  complained

Special Delivery Sometimes, extreme
measures are taken to deliver a congressional
bill to the president for his signature. A White
House aide took a commercial flight from
Washington, D.C., to the nation of Brunei to
give President Clinton a resolution that needed
to be signed no later than November 15, 2000.
The funding bill allowed government operations
to continue until Congress reconvened.

that  the  independent  counsel  process  led  to  long,
expensive  investigations  that  failed  to  separate 
politics  from  law. In  1999  Congress  let  the  law 
expire and gave the Attorney General sole power to
conduct ethics investigations of top officials.

GOVERNMENT

Student Web Activity Visit the United States
Government: Democracy  in Action Web site at
gov.glencoe.com and click on Chapter 6–Student
Web Activities for an activity about Congress.

S e c t i o n   2   A s s e s s m e n t
S e c t i o n   2   A s s e s s m e n t

Checking for Understanding
1. Main Idea Using a graphic organizer like the one
shown, identify the steps Congress can take 
2.
if a witness at a congressional 
investigation cites Fifth 
Amendment protection 
and refuses to testify.
2. Define subpoena, perjury, contempt, immunity,
legislative veto.
3. Identify Watkins v. United States, GAO.
4. Identify three congressional investigations that
focused on the executive branch.

1.

Critical Thinking
5. Synthesizing Information How does the use of 
a subpoena assist legislators in the committee
hearing process?

Checks and Balances Suppose you are a re-
porter assigned to cover a recent congression-
al investigation. Prepare a news broadcast to
present to the class in which you analyze the
purpose of the investigation and its findings.
You might want to include interviews as well.

CHAPTER 6: DEVELOPMENT OF CONGRESSIONAL POWERS 171

172-179 CH06S3-860053  12/1/04  2:46 AM  Page 172

S e c t i o n   3
S e c t i o n   3
Congress and the President
The Founders probably did not  envision  a
Reader’s Guide
shutdown  of the  federal  government
when  they  established  the  principle  of
separation  of powers. Nevertheless, they
did create a system of checks and balances that can
result  in  a  government  stalemate. Many  of the
president’s most important executive responsibili-
ties—such  as making  treaties, appointing  federal
officials and judges, and paying the expenses of the
executive branch—require congressional coopera-
tion. When  the Congress  refuses  to cooperate, the
president may be frustrated.
On the other hand, all bills Congress passes re-
quire the president’s signature before they become
law. Overriding a presidential veto requires a two-
thirds majority  in  each  house  of Congress, which
usually  is difficult  to obtain. Consequently, a veto
or even the threat of one is an important legislative
power  the  president  exercises. In  addition, mod-
ern presidents are expected to develop a legislative
program and secure its adoption by Congress.

Key Terms
national budget, impoundment
Find Out
■ How have  the characteristics of  the American
system  led  to competition and conflict between
Congress and  the president?
■ Why has power shifted back and  forth between
the president and Congress over  the years?
Understanding Concepts
Checks and Balances Why do some people state
that deadlock and inaction are built-in features of
American government?

Shu tdown  Con f l ic t
WASH INGTON ,  D .C . ,   JANUARY 1 9 9 6  
P r e s i d e n t   C l i n t o n   a n d
Con g r e s s  a r e   s e a r ch i n g
f e v e r i s h l y   f o r   a   c om p r o -
m i s e   t o   e n d   t h e   b u d g e t  
im p a s s e   t h a t   h a s   b r o u g h t
t h e   p a r t i a l   s h u t d ow n   o f
t h e   f e d e r a l   g o v e r nm e n t .
Me a nw h i l e , t h e   s h u t d ow n
i s   b e g i n n i n g   to   a f f e c t   g o v -
e r nm e n t   s e r v i c e s . “ T h i s   i s
G o v e r nm e n t   c l o s e d
s a y s   D o t t i e
r i d i c u l o u s ,”
u n t i l   f u r t h e r   n o t i c e
K n i g h t , a   f u r l o u g h e d   em -
p l o y e e   o f t h e   C e n t e r s   f o r
D i s e a s e   Con t ro l   i n   A t l a n t a . Kn i g h t   i s   wo r k i n g   f rom
h om e  w i t h o u t   p ay, b uy i n g   s t am p s   to   con t i nu e  m a i l -
i n g  CDC  m a t e r i a l s   to   t h e  p u b l i c . In  Ka n s a s , t h e   s t a t e
h a s   s u s p e n d e d   u n em p l oym e n t   ch e c k s   b e c a u s e   f e d -
e r a l   f un d s   h ave   s to p p e d .

172 CHAPTER 6: DEVELOPMENT OF CONGRESSIONAL POWERS

Cooperation and Conflict
The  level  of cooperation  between  Con-
gress  and  the  president  has  varied
throughout  history. Usually, the  best  relations
exist  between  the  two  branches when  the  presi-
dent makes  few  demands  on Congress. Less  ac-
tive  presidents—such  as Dwight D. Eisenhower
during  the  1950s—who  do  not  take  an  aggres-
sive  role  in  shaping  legislation may  get  along
well with Congress. Those who  propose major
new  programs  w ill  almost  surely  come  into
conflict with the legislative branch. Recent pres-
idents  have  frequently  found  it  hard  to work
with Congress for several reasons.
Constituents  and  Conflict A  large  na-
tional  electorate  chooses  presidents who  pro-
mote policies they feel are  in the best  interests
of the entire nation. Individual states and con-
gressional districts, however, elect members of

172-179 CH06S3-860053  12/1/04  2:46 AM  Page 173

Gridlock Haunts the Capital

Congress. Because  they  repre-
sent much  narrower  interests,
members  of Congress  often
have  ideas  very  different  from
the president about what con-
stitutes desirable public policy.
Checks  and  Balances
The system of checks and bal-
ances  gives Congress  and  the
president  the  power  to  coun-
teract each other. For example,
the  president may  threaten  a
veto, arguing  that  a  particular
bill  spends  too much  money
and  would  spur 
inflation
harmful  to  the  nation. Some
members of Congress may co-
operate 
to
in  attempting 
amend  the  bill  or  override  a
veto  because  their  states  or
districts  would  benefit  from
the bill.
Political  historian  James
MacGregor  Burns  contends
that the system is “designed for deadlock and inac-
tion.” He argues that these checks and balances re-
sult in the “President versus Congress.”
Party  Politics Par tisan  political  differences
can  affect  the  relationship  between  the  president
and Congress. This  is  especially  evident when  the
different  par ties  control  the  White  House  and
Congress. In  recent  decades  the  president’s  party
rarely  has  controlled  both  houses  of Congress, so
conflict  between  the  branches  has  increased. The
legislative  process  slowed  considerably  in  1995
when  President  Clinton, a   Democrat, faced  Re-
publican majorities  in Congress. When  President
Clinton won  reelection  in  1996  and  the  Republi-
cans  again won  both  houses, one  observer  antici-
pated more   of what  the  press  had  begun  to   call
“gridlock.”
“ The question in the next two years, will be
whether that lack of mandate for either
side will foster cooperation to get things
done or positioning to do battle in the next
election. ”

—Curtis B. Gans

President and Congress Clash Gridlock occurs when the
president and Congress cannot agree on legislation. According
to the cartoon, is gridlock a problem that is quickly or 
easily resolved? Explain.

Organization as a Cause of Conflict The
organization of Congress provides many weapons
to those who want to resist a legislative proposal of
the president. Rules of procedure, such as the Sen-
ate’s  unlimited  debate  rule, can  be  used  to  block
action  on  legislation. Even  when  congressional
leaders support the president, they may struggle to
push presidential initiatives through Congress.
Because  the basic  shape of legislation  is  set  in
committees  and  subcommittees, the  committee
system also may be a weapon against the president.
Committee chairpersons are powerful members of
Congress, and they use their positions to influence
bills. Conflicts in government occur when a presi-
dent wants a major proposal approved and a com-
mittee tries to delay, revise, or defeat it.
Differing  Political  Timetables Conflicts
may  also  occur  because  the  president  and Con-
gress have different political timetables. Presidents
have a little more than three years to develop, pre-
sent, and move  their  programs  through Congress
before  they  have  to  busy  themselves  running  for
reelection. At  best, they  have   only  eight  years  to  
accomplish their agenda.

CHAPTER 6: DEVELOPMENT OF CONGRESSIONAL POWERS 173

172-179 CH06S3-860053  12/1/04  2:46 AM  Page 174

Presidential Vetoes
Presidential Vetoes
All Bills
Regular
Pocket
Vetoes 
Vetoed
Vetoes
Vetoes
Overridden

President

Washington
J. Adams
Jefferson
Madison
Monroe
J.Q. Adams
Jackson
Van Buren
W.H. Harrison
Tyler
Polk
Taylor
Fillmore
Pierce
Buchanan
Lincoln
A. Johnson
Grant
Hayes
Garfield
Arthur
Cleveland (1st term)
B. Harrison
Cleveland (2d term)
McKinley
T. Roosevelt
Taft
Wilson
Harding
Coolidge
Hoover
F. Roosevelt
Truman
Eisenhower
Kennedy
L. Johnson
Nixon
Ford
Carter
Reagan
G.H.W. Bush
Clinton
G.W. Bush*
Total

2
0
0
7
1
0
12
1
0
10
3
0
0
9
7
7
29
93
13
0
12
414
44
170
42
82
39
44
6
50
37
635
250
181
21
30
43
66
31
78
46
37
0
2,552

2
0
0
5
1
0
5
0
0
6
2
0
0
9
4
2
21
45
12
0
4
304
19
42
6
42
30
33
5
20
21
372
180
73
12
16
26
48
13
39
29
36
0
1,484

0
0
0
2
0
0
7
1
0
4
1
0
0
0
3
5
8
48
1
0
8
110
25
128
36
40
9
11
1
30
16
263
70
108
9
14
17
18
18
39
17
1
0
1,068

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
5
0
0
15
4
1
0
1
2
1
5
0
1
1
6
0
4
3
9
12
2
0
0
7
12
2
9
1
2
0
106

Source: thomas.loc.gov .

* As of November 2004.

Critical Thinking
 
 
    Early presidents often vetoed 
legislation they thought was unconstitutional. 
What concerns cause modern-day presidents to 
veto legislation? 

Senators and representatives are not limited to
two  terms  in  office  as  is  the  president. Most  can
look  forward  to  being  reelected  for many  terms.
Consequently, members of Congress have political
timetables  quite  different  from  the  president.
Representatives, who  serve  only  two-year  terms,
are always running for reelection. Senators, whose
terms  are  six  years, can  be more  patient  in  han-
dling controversial legislative proposals. Thus, law-
makers in both houses may not be eager to act on
legislation that does not directly benefit their states
or districts.
President Lyndon Johnson, who had served as
Senate majority leader, complained about the con-
flict of interests:
“You’ve got to give it all you can that first
year. . . . You’ve got just one year when
they treat you right, and before they start
worrying about themselves. The third year,
you lose votes. . . . The fourth year’s all pol-
itics. You can’t put anything through when
half the Congress is thinking how to beat
you. ”
The Struggle for Power
For  most  of the  first  150  years  of the
Republic, Congress dominated policy mak-
ing. At  times, however, strong  presidents  such  as
Andrew  Jackson, Abraham  Lincoln, and  Franklin
D. Roosevelt  challenged  congressional  supremacy.
They  increased  presidential  powers  as  they  dealt
w ith  changing  social, political, and  economic
conditions.
The  system  of checks  and  balances makes  it
likely  that  the  president  and Congress will  always
compete for power. Which branch will dominate in
any  specific  period  depends  on  many  factors,
including  the  political  issues  of the  time  and 
the  leaders  in Congress  and  the  executive  branch.
S t r o n g   p r e s i d e n t i a l   l e a d e r s h i p   d u r i n g   t h e  
Depression of the 1930s and the Cold War caused a
steady growth in the powers of the presidency at the
expense of Congress. During  the mid-1970s, how-
ever, the  trend  toward  p re s id en t i a l   d om in an c e
b e g a n   to   stimulate  a  reaction  from  Congress.
Cong ress iona l  effor ts  to  reasser t  lost  author ity
a n d   to   g a i n   n ew   influence  in  public  policy  led

—Lyndon Johnson

174 CHAPTER 6: DEVELOPMENT OF CONGRESSIONAL POWERS

172-179 CH06S3-860053  12/1/04  2:46 AM  Page 175

Congress to restrict the president’s war-making and
budgetary  powers  and  to  exercise  the  legislative
veto more often.
Curbing  the  President’s  Emergency
Powers In times of crisis, Congress has delegat-
ed  additional  powers  to  the  president. Presidents
have  declared mar tial  law, seized  proper ty, con-
trolled  transportation  and  communication, and
sent  armed  forces  overseas. President  Franklin D.
Roosevelt  gained  vast  authority  during  the Great
Depression  and World War  II. In  1933 Congress
empowered  the  president  to  close  the  nation’s
banks. Legislation during World War II gave Roo-
sevelt even broader control over the nation’s econ-
omy, including  industries, wages  and  prices, and
the rationing of consumer goods. Later presidents
continued  the  emergency powers  initially  granted
to Roosevelt, and  technically  the United States  re-
mained in a state of emergency. In 1971, for exam-
ple, President  Nixon  froze  wages  and  prices  to
combat  economic  problems  stemming  from  the
Vietnam War.
In  1976 Congress  passed  the National  Emer-
gencies Act  that  ended  the  35-year  state  of emer-
gency  as  of September  30, 1978. Since  that  date
presidents no longer possess automatic emergency

powers. Presidents  must  notify  Congress  when
they  intend  to  declare  a  national  emergency. A
state of emergency now cannot last more than one
year unless the president repeats the process. In ad-
dition, Congress  can  end  a  state  of emergency  at
any time by passing legislation.
The Budget Impoundment and Control Act
Over  the  years  presidents  have  assumed more  re-
sponsibility for planning the national budget, the
yearly  financial plan  for  the national government.
Because  of this, by  the  early  1970s Congress  had
slipped  into  the  role  of merely  reacting  to  budget
proposals.
In  1974  Congress  passed  the  Congressional
Budget and Impoundment Control Act in an effort
to increase its role in planning the budget. The act
established  a  permanent  budget  committee  for
each  house  and  created  a Congressional Budget
Office (CBO) to provide  financial  experts  to help
Congress. In  addition, the  act  limited  the  presi-
dent’s ability to impound funds. Impoundment is
the  president’s  refusal  to  spend money Congress
has voted to fund a program. The law requires that
appropriated  funds  be  spent  unless  the  president
requests  and  both  houses  of Congress  agree  that
the monies not be spent.

Crisis and Power

Additional Powers During
World War II, President
Franklin D. Roosevelt em-
ployed emergency powers to
gain more control over the
wartime economy. Americans
used government-issued
books of ration coupons to
purchase certain items,
such as shoes, gaso-
line, tires, sugar, and
meat. Why did
Roosevelt need to
ration consumer
goods during
the war?

Ration 
coupons

CHAPTER 6: DEVELOPMENT OF CONGRESSIONAL POWERS 175

172-179 CH06S3-860053  12/1/04  2:46 AM  Page 176

Use  of  the  Legislative  Veto Between  1932
and  1983—when  it was  declared  unconstitution-
al—more than 200 laws have contained some form
of legislative  veto. The  veto was  not widely  used,
however, until Congress reasserted its authority in
the 1970s. Many members of Congress argued that
the device was  an  effective  check on  the  executive
branch.
Presidents  have  called  the  legislative  veto  a
challenge to their authority. President Carter com-
plained  that  its use was “excessive.” Others argued
that  it  v iolated  separation  of powers. Since  the
Supreme Court ruling, Congress has searched for a
constitutional alternative to the legislative veto.
Line-Item Veto The Constitution provides for
a presidential  veto of entire bills. Most  governors,
however, can veto parts of bills, letting the rest be-
come  law. Many  presidents  have  asked Congress
for  a  line-item  veto, enabling  them  to  veto  only
certain lines or items in a bill.
Sentiment  for  giving  the  president  such  veto
power  was  strong  in  the  mid-1990s. Congress
knew, however, that a true line-item veto would re-
quire a constitutional amendment. House and Sen-
ate  Republicans  passed  a  complex  version  of a
line-item  veto  bill  in  1996, calling  it  an  enhanced
rescission bill. Signed into law by President Clinton,
the  bill  authorized  the  president  to  veto  spending

items  and  certain  limited  tax  breaks. In  the  Line
Item Veto Act, Congress  attempted  to  retain  some
control  over  such  legislation  by  a  provision  that  it
could pass a freestanding bill to reinstate the vetoed
spending  by  a  two-thirds  vote  of both  chambers.
This act went into effect in 1997.
In  the  summer  of 1997, President Clinton  be-
came  the  first  president  to  exercise  the  line-item
veto. Even  after  it was  passed, however, critics  re-
mained  vocal  about  the  new  law. Supporters  be-
lieved  it would curb excessive spending, but critics
said  it  allowed Congress  to  shift  the  responsibility
of making spending cuts to the president.
Almost  immediately  some members  of Con-
gress  challenged  the  law  in  federal  court. The
Supreme Court  threw  out  this  challenge  but  later
ruled on the constitutional merits of the legislation.
In 1998, upholding separate challenges by the City
of New York  and  potato  growers  from  Idaho, the
Court said that the Line Item Veto Act was uncon-
stitutional.
Justice John Paul Stevens wrote for the majori-
ty  that  the  act  circumvented  the  legislative  proce-
dures which were clearly spelled out  in Article  I of
the Constitution. “If there is to be a new procedure
in which the President will play a different role  . . .
such  change  must  come  not  by  legislation  but
through  the  amendment  procedures  set  forth  in
Article V of the Constitution,” Stevens concluded.

S e c t i o n   3   A s s e s s m e n t
S e c t i o n   3   A s s e s s m e n t

Checking for Understanding
1. Main Idea Using a graphic organizer like the 
one below, identify three ways in which Con-
gress has gained and lost power.
+

–

Critical Thinking
6. Synthesizing Information One analyst described
the constitutional system between Congress 
and the president as “an invitation to struggle.”
Is this description accurate? Explain.

Congress

2. Define national budget, impoundment.
3. Identify Congressional Budget Office.
4. Why do the different constituencies of the 
president and Congress cause conflict between
the executive and legislative branches?
5. How does the political party system contribute
to conflict between the president and Congress?

Checks and Balances One struggle for 
power that exists between the president and
Congress is the president’s right to send armed
forces overseas. When has the president 
committed military forces overseas without a
declaration of war? Create a time line indicating
the year and the reason for these military 
involvements.

176 CHAPTER 6: DEVELOPMENT OF CONGRESSIONAL POWERS

172-179 CH06S3-860053  12/1/04  2:47 AM  Page 177

Technology
Technology

Multimedia Presentations
Your government teacher has assigned a 
presentation about Congress. You want to
develop a presentation that really holds
your classmates’ attention.
Learning the Skill
Most presentations are more dynamic if they
include diagrams, photographs, videos, or sound
recordings. Equipment you may have at home,
plus classroom or library resources, can help you
develop interesting multimedia presentations.
The equipment can range from simple cassette
players, to overhead projectors, to VCRs, to 
computers, and beyond.
A multimedia presentation involves using
several types of media. To discuss Congress’s
powers, for example, you might show diagrams 
of congressional powers and play recordings of
speeches made in Congress.
Multimedia, as it relates to computer technol-
ogy, is the combination of text, video, audio, and
animation in an interactive computer program.
In order to create multimedia presentations on a
computer, though, you need to have certain tools.
These may include traditional computer graphic
tools and draw programs, animation programs,
and authoring systems that tie everything togeth-
er. Your computer manual will tell you which
tools your computer can support.

preliminary survey of materials that may be 
available and list them. Use the following 
questions as a guide when planning your 
presentation:
1. Which forms of media do I want to include?
Video? Sound? Animation? Photographs?
Graphics? 
2. Which kinds of media equipment are available
at my school or local library?
3. What types of media can I create to enhance
my presentation?
4. Which of these media forms does my comput-
er support?

Practicing the Skill
Plan and create a multimedia presentation 
on a topic found in the chapter, such as the non-
legislative powers. List three or four major ideas
you would like to cover. Then think about how
multimedia resources could enhance your presen-
tation. Use your school or local library to do a

Application Activity
Application Activity
Choose a president from the twentieth
century and create a multimedia presenta-
tion about his conflict and cooperation with
Congress. Use as many multimedia materi-
als as possible, including photographs,
drawings, charts, graphs, posters, music
recordings, or videotapes. Share your multi-
media presentation with the class.

177

172-179 CH06S3-860053  12/1/04  2:47 AM  Page 178

C h a p t e r   6
C h a p t e r   6
Assessment and Activities
1. Powers not specified in the Constitution
2. Grants money to carry out programs
GOVERNMENT
3. Compels a witness to appear
4. Refusing to spend funds
5. Freedom from prosecution

Self-Check Quiz Visit the United States Government:
Democracy  in Action Web site at gov.glencoe.com and
click on Chapter 6–Self-Check Quizzes to prepare  for
the chapter test.

Reviewing Key Terms
Match each of the descriptions below with the
term it describes. Not every term will have a 
description.
a. appropriations bill
b. impoundment
c. immunity
d. implied powers
e. legislative veto
f. subpoena

Selected Powers of Congress
Legislative Powers
• Taxing and Spending Power—Congress has great control 
over national policy, as no agency can spend money 
without congressional approval
• Commerce Power—Congress regulates foreign commerce
and trade between the states

Nonlegislative Powers
• Ratification Power—Congress accepts or rejects treaties
negotiated between the president and a foreign country
• Power to Choose Presidents—The House selects the president 
if no candidate wins a majority of votes in the Electoral College
• Removal Power—Both houses of Congress play a role in the
removal of a president from office due to misconduct

Investigative Powers
• Constitution does not specifically state this power, but the 
legislature’s role as a people’s body made this power necessary
• Congress investigates the operation of government agencies 
and the actions of individual government personnel

Recalling Facts
1. How are expressed powers and implied 
powers related?
2. Why has the power to regulate interstate 
commerce become such an important power
of Congress?
3. List five nonlegislative powers of Congress.
4. What are three methods that Congress uses
to oversee the executive branch?
5. Identify three powers that Congress and the
president share.
6. What are the main causes of conflict between
the president and Congress?
7. On what grounds did the Supreme Court de-
clare the legislative veto unconstitutional?

Understanding Concepts 
1. Constitutional Interpretations Explain how the
Constitution’s commerce clause has helped
African Americans obtain equal rights.
2. Checks and Balances What arguments might be
made to support a legislative veto power for
Congress?

Critical Thinking
1. Making Generalizations On what basis might the
writers of the Constitution have decided which
powers should go only to Congress and which 
powers Congress should share with the president?
2. Understanding Cause and Effect In a graphic 
organizer like the one below, indicate how 
the power struggle between the president 
and Congress 
strengthens or 
weakens the 
government.

Power Struggle

Strengthening
Effects

Weakening
Effects

172-179 CH06S3-860053  12/1/04  2:47 AM  Page 179

C h a p t e r   6
C h a p t e r   6

“Half full.”

Analyzing Primary
Sources 
In 1964, Congress granted
President Johnson the power to
send troops into Vietnam with-
out an official declaration of
war and without notification to
Congress. Congress later en-
acted a law requiring the presi-
dent to notify and consult with
Congress any time soldiers are
to be stationed in conflicts
overseas. This law is known as
the War Powers Act. Read the
excerpt and answer the ques-
tions that follow.
“SEC. 3. The President in every
possible instance shall consult with
Congress before introducing United
States Armed Forces into hostilities
or into situation where imminent
involvement in hostilities is clearly
indicated by the circumstances, and
after every such introduction shall
consult regularly with the Congress
until United States Armed Forces
are no longer engaged in hostilities or have been removed
from such situations.”
1. How is the 1973 War Powers Act a check on
presidential power?
2. What are the benefits or drawbacks of requir-
ing the president to notify Congress before
sending troops into conflict?
Applying Technology Skills
Creating a Multimedia Presentation Study
the list of topics below dealing with Congress.
Choose one of the topics and create a presentation
using at least three types of media to teach the topic
to your class.
• The national debt and Congress’s attempts
to limit it
• The War Powers Act and the relationship 
between Congress and the president
• The power of Congress to propose 
amendments
• A congressional investigation
• Congressional term limits

Interpreting Political Cartoons Activity

“Half empty.”

“Half empty due to congressional
inaction and half full due to the
tireless efforts of the President.”

1. What is happening in this cartoon?
2. Which side does the administration spokesperson support?
Explain.
3. Is the administration spokesperson an objective judge?
What biases might he have?

Participating 
in Local
Government
Because members of Con-
gress represent the inter-
ests of individual states
and congressional districts,
their ideas are often different
from the president’s, which pro-
mote policies that represent the interests 
of the entire nation. Find out about an important
issue in your state that has been reflected in 
a bill debated in Congress. Find out how your 
senators and representatives stand on the issue
and how they voted on the bill.
Did you agree or disagree with the senator’s 
or representative’s position on the bill? Write 
an opinion paper supporting or criticizing your 
lawmaker’s position.

CHAPTER 6: DEVELOPMENT OF CONGRESSIONAL POWERS 179

