180-188 CH07S1-860053  12/1/04  2:48 AM  Page 180

Serving You Congress’s primary 
responsibility is to make law. Members
of Congress also make appointments to
military academies, provide passes to
visit the Capitol and the White House,
and help citizens deal with the govern-
ment bureaucracy.  

To learn more about how 
Congress works and how to
access its services, view the Democracy
in Action Chapter 7 video lesson:
Congress at Work

★       ★       ★       ★       ★       ★       ★       ★       ★       ★

GOVERNMENT

Chapter Overview Visit the United States
Government: Democracy  in Action Web site
at gov.glencoe.com and click on Chapter
7—Overview to preview chapter  information.

180

180-188 CH07S1-860053  12/1/04  2:49 AM  Page 181

S e c t i o n   1
S e c t i o n   1
How a Bill Becomes a Law
In 1957  the Civil Rights Bill was one of many
Reader’s Guide
bills introduced in Congress. Unlike a majority
of the  bills  introduced  that  year, and  against
the backdrop of a lengthy filibuster, it passed.
During  each  2-year  term  of Congress, thousands
of bills  are  introduced. Why  are  so many  intro-
duced?  Congress, as  the  national  legislature, is
open  to  all Americans who want  things  from  the
government. The president, federal agencies, labor
unions, business groups, and individual citizens all
look  to  Congress  to  pass  laws  favorable  to  their
various interests.
Of the  thousands  of bills  introduced  in  each
session, only a few hundred become laws. Most die
in Congress, and some are vetoed by the president.
If a bill  is not passed before  the  end of a  congres-
sional  term, it must  be  reintroduced  in  the  next
Congress to be given further consideration.
In  this  section  you will  find out how  the  law-
making process actually works. First you will look
at  the  different  forms  new  legislation may  take.
Then you will learn about the steps a bill must go
through in order to become a law.

Key Terms
private bill, public bill, simple resolution, rider,
hearing, veto, pocket veto
Find Out
■ Why  is  it easier  to defeat  legislation  than  to
pass  it?
■ What are  the positive and negative  implications
of  the  lengthy process  through which all bills
must go before becoming  laws? 
Understanding Concepts
Political Processes Why does it take so long for
Congress to pass legislation?

Record  F i l ibus ter  Fa i ls
WASH INGTON ,  D .C . ,  AUGUST 1 9 5 7
T h e  S e n a t e  p a s s e d  a  m a j o r
c i v i l   r i g h t s   b i l l   t o n i g h t ,
d e s p i t e   t h e   e f f o r t s   o f S o u t h
S t r om
s e n a t o r  
C a r o l i n a  
T hu rm on d  to  p r e ven t  i t  f rom
com in g   to   a   vo t e . T hu rm on d
f l o o r   y e s t e r d a y
t h e  
t o o k  
e v e n i n g   a n d   t a l k e d   t h r o u g h
t h e   n i g h t . A   g l a s s   o f o r a n g e
j u i c e  o f f e r e d  by  an o t h e r  s en a -
S t r om   T h u rm o n d  
t o r   t h i s   m o r n i n g   r e f r e s h e d
s e t s   a   r e c o r d
T h u rm o n d   f o r   s e v e r a l   m o r e
h o u r s , b u t   b y   l a t e   t h i s   a f t e r -
n o o n , h e  w a s   l e a n i n g  o n  h i s  d e s k  a n d  mum b l i n g . F i -
n a l l y, a t   9 : 1 2   P.M . , h e   s a t   d ow n , h av in g   h e l d   t h e   f l o o r
f o r  m o r e   t h a n  2 4  h o u r s , t h e   l o n g e s t   s p e e ch   i n  S e n a t e
h i s to r y. A   s h o r t   t im e   l a t e r   a   vo t e   w a s   c a l l e d , a n d   t h e
b i l l   p a s s e d   6 0   to   1 8 .

Types of Bills and Resolutions
Two  types of bills are  introduced  in Con-
gress. Pr ivate  bills deal  w ith  indiv idual
people  or  places. They  often  involve  people’s
claims against the government or their immigra-
tion problems. One such private bill waived im-
migration  requirements  so  that  an  American
woman could marry a man from Greece. Private
bills  used  to  account  for  a  large  number  of the
bills  introduced  in Congress. Lately, however,
their  numbers  have  declined. In  a  recent Con-
gress, only  a  few  hundred  of the  11,722  bills 
introduced were private bills.
On  the  other  hand, public  bills deal with
general matters and apply  to  the entire nation.
They are often controversial. Major public bills
usually  receive  significant  media  coverage.
They  may  involve  such  issues  as  raising  or 

▲

Inside the Senate

CHAPTER 7: CONGRESS AT WORK 181

180-188 CH07S1-860053  12/1/04  2:49 AM  Page 182

lowering taxes, national health insurance, gun con-
trol, civil rights, or abortion. Major public bills ac-
count  for  about  30  percent  of the  bills  passed  in
each  term  of Congress. They may  be  debated  for
months before they become law.
Resolutions Congress  may  also  pass  several
types  of resolutions  to  deal with  unusual  or  tem-
porary matters. A  simple  resolution covers mat-
ters  affecting  only  one  house  of Congress  and  is
passed by that house alone. If a new rule or proce-
dure is needed, it is adopted in the form of a reso-
lution. Because it is an internal matter, it does not
have  the  force  of law  and  is  not  sent  to  the  presi-
dent for signature.
Joint  Resolutions When  both houses pass  a
joint resolution the president’s signature gives it the
force of law. Joint  resolutions may  correct  an  error
in an earlier law, for example, or appropriate money
for a special purpose. Congress also uses joint reso-
lutions  to  propose  constitutional  amendments,
which do not require the president’s signature.
Concurrent  Resolutions Another  type  of
resolution  is a concurrent resolution. Concurrent
resolutions cover matters  requiring  the  action  of

the House  and  Senate, but  on which  a  law  is  not
needed. A concurrent resolution, for example, may
set the date for the adjournment of Congress, or it
may  express  Congress’s  opinion  about  an  issue.
Both  houses  of Congress  must  pass  concurrent
resolutions. They  do  not  require  the  president’s
signature, and they do not have the force of law.
Riders Bills  and  resolutions  usually  deal  with
only  one  subject, such  as  civil  rights  or  veterans’
benefits. Sometimes, however, a rider is attached to
a bill. A rider is a provision on a subject other than
the one covered in the bill. Lawmakers attach riders
to  bills  that  are  likely  to  pass, although  presidents
have sometimes vetoed such bills because of a rider
they  did  not  like. Sometimes  lawmakers  attach
many unrelated  riders  simply  to benefit  their  con-
stituents. Such  a  bill  resembles  a  Christmas  tree
loaded  with  ornaments. “Christmas  tree” bills
sometimes  pass  because  of the  essential  nature  of
the underlying bill.
Why So Few Bills Become Laws Less than
10  percent  of all  bills  introduced  in Congress  be-
come public laws. Why so few?
One reason is that the lawmaking process itself
is  very  long  and  complicated. A  congressional

Initiating Legislation 
H ave you ever said, “There ought to be 
a law!” when observing an apparent 
injustice? Some acts of Congress originate
with private individuals or groups. If you see a 
need for a law, you can write a bill and ask 
a representative or senator to introduce it for 
consideration. 
Rarely, if ever, does a bill begin this way. How-
ever, a representative may agree to sponsor your
bill. A sponsor will work to put your bill in the prop-
er form for introduction. The sponsor may also
make changes in your bill’s content to increase its
chances for passage. 
After your bill is introduced, if you are consid-
ered an expert on the subject of the bill you 
may be asked to testify before a congressional

182

committee. You may also
contact other members of
Congress to request their
support for your legislation.
Finally, if Congress passes
your bill, be prepared for an
invitation to the White House
to participate in the presi-
dent’s signing ceremony!

Proposing a law

articipating
articipating
I N   G O V E R N M E N T  
I N   G O V E R N M E N T  

A C T I V I T Y
A C T I V I T Y

Writing Legislation Most  legislation springs  from
a problem  that people cannot  resolve  them-
selves. Brainstorm  to discover a problem  that
might be solved by national  legislation and write
a description of  it. 

180-188 CH07S1-860053  12/1/04  2:49 AM  Page 183

study found that more than 100 specific steps may
be involved in passing a law. Thus, at many points
in  the  lawmaking  process  a  bill  can  be  delayed,
killed, or changed. This process has two important
implications. First, it means  that  groups  that  op-
pose a bill have an advantage over  those  that  sup-
port  it. Opponents  can  amend  the bill or  kill  it  at
many steps along the way.
Second, because  the  lawmaking process has  so
many steps, sponsors of a bill must be willing to bar-
gain  and  compromise with  lawmakers  and  interest
groups. Compromise is the only way to get support
to move  a  bill  from  one  step  to  the next. Without
strong  support, most major  bills have  little  chance
of becoming  law. Moreover, bills  that powerful  in-
terest groups oppose are not likely to be passed.
Another reason so few bills become law is that
lawmakers  sometimes  introduce   bills  they  know
have no chance of ever becoming law. Members of
Congress may introduce such bills to go on record
in support of an idea or policy or simply to attract
the  attention  of the  news media. Members may
also want to satisfy an important group from their
state or district. Still another reason is to call atten-
tion to the need for new legislation in an area such
as health care or highway safety. Introducing a bill
can  help  lawmakers  avoid  criticism  at  reelection
time. By  introducing  a  bill, lawmakers  can  report
that  they  have  taken  action  on  a  particular  prob-
lem. When  the  bill  does  not move   forward, they
can blame a committee or other lawmakers.

Introducing a Bill
The Constitution sets forth only a few of the
many  steps  a  bill must  go  through  to  be-
come  law. The  remaining  steps  have  developed  as
Congress has grown in size and complexity and the
number of bills has increased.
How  Bills  Are  Introduced The  first  step  in
the  legislative  process  is  proposing  and  introduc-
ing  a  new  bill. The  ideas  for  new  bills  come  from
private  citizens, interest  groups, the  president, or
officials  in  the  executive  branch. Various  people
may write  new  bills, such   as  lawmakers  or  their
staffs, lawyers from a Senate or House committee,
a White House  staff member, or  even  an  interest 

Number of Bills 
Number of Bills 
That Become Law
That Become Law
Public Laws Enacted

500

400

300

200

100

0

’83 ’85 ’87 ’89 ’91 ’93 ’95

’97 ’99 ’01 ’03

Bills, Acts, and Resolutions
Measures 
Measures 
Enacted
Introduced
Joint  
 Resolutions

Public Private

Total

Bills   

Total

Congress

97th

98th

99th

10,582

908

11,490

10,134

1,022

11,156

9,885

9,588

8,697

1,188

100th

8,515

1,073

101st

9,257

1,095

10,352

102d

103d

9,601

7,883

104th

6,545

105th

7,532

106th

8,968

107th

8,956

108th*

7,359

909

661

263

200

190

178

139

10,510

8,544

6,808

7,732

9,158

9,134

7,498

473

623

664

713

650

590

465

333

394

580

377

256

56

54

24

48

16

20

8

4

10

24

6

0

529

677

688

761

666

610

473

337

404

604

383

265

*Figures represent activity through June 30, 2004.

Source: "Resumes of Congressional Activity," 
thomas.loc.gov.

Critical Thinking
 
 
    Approximately 5 percent 
of all measures introduced in Congress 
become policy. Which Congress passed the 
most bills from 1983 to 2003?

CHAPTER 7: CONGRESS AT WORK 183

180-188 CH07S1-860053  12/1/04  2:49 AM  Page 184

considered experts on their subjects. If they do not
think  a  bill  should move  ahead, other  lawmakers
will usually agree with them. Time is also a serious
factor. Lawmakers have heavy workloads and must
depend on the judgment of their peers.
Committee Hear ings When a committee de-
cides to act on a bill, the committee holds hearings on
the  bill. During  a  hearing, the  committee  listens
to testimony from witnesses who may include experts
on  the  subject of the bill, government officials, or
representatives  of interest  groups  concerned  with
the bill.
Hearings  are  supposed  to  be  an  opportunity
for  Congress  to  gather  information  on  the  bill.
Most detailed information about the bill, however,
comes from research done by the committee staff.
Hearings  can  be  very  impor tant  in  their
own right, though. Skillful  chairpersons may  use
hearings to influence public opinion for or against
a  bill  or  to  test  the  political  acceptability  of a  bill.
Hearings can also help focus public attention on a
problem or give interest groups a chance to present
their opinions. In  addition, hearings  are often  the
best point in the lawmaking process to influence a
bill. It  is  during  hearings  that  letters, telegrams,
and e-mails from interested citizens can have their
greatest impact on a bill.
Many  Senate  and  House  committees  use  the
Internet  to  set up  interactive hearings with  expert
witnesses  at  locations  outside  Washington, D.C.
Committees  may  also  broadcast  hearings  over
the Internet and allow visitors to e-mail questions to
committee members. Committees also use their Web
home pages to make committee reports, documents,
and other  information  available  to Web users. One
example  is  the  House  Education  and  Workforce
Committee, which  became  the  first  committee
to create  a  Spanish-language  Web site  to  inform
Spanish speakers of President George W. Bush’s new
education programs.
Markup  Session After  the  hearings  are  com-
pleted, the  committee meets  in  a markup  session
to decide what changes, if any, to make in the bill.
In  this  type  of session, committee  members  go
through  the  bill  section  by  section, making  any
changes  they  think  the bill needs. A majority vote
of the  committee  is  required  for  all  changes  that
are made to the bill.

Follow the Leader In Congress, whips
aren’t there to speed up the process of
government. Rather, whips are leaders who
make sure party members vote along with 
the rest of the party on bills. The term was
originally used in the British 
House of Commons. The term 
comes from fox hunting , in 
which a person, known as 
a “whipper-in,” whips the 
dogs to keep them running 
in a pack.

group itself. Only a member of Congress, however,
can  introduce  a  bill  in  either  house  of Congress.
Lawmakers who sponsor a major public bill usual-
ly  try  to  find  cosponsors  to  show  that  the  bill  has
wide support.
To introduce a bill in the House, a representa-
tive  drops  the  bill  into  the  hopper, a  box  near  the
clerk’s  desk. To  introduce  a  bill  in  the  Senate, the
presiding  officer must  first  recognize  the  senator
who then formally presents the bill.
Bills  introduced  in  the House  and  Senate  are
printed and distributed to  lawmakers. Each bill  is
g iven  a  title  and  a  number. The  first  bill  intro-
duced during a session of the Senate is designated
as  S.l, the  second  bill  as  S.2, and  so  forth. In  the
House, the  first  bill  is  H.R.1, the  second  bill  is
H.R.2, and so on. This process is the first reading
of the bill.
Committee  Action In  each  house  of Con-
gress, new bills are sent to the committees that deal
with their subject matter. Committee chairpersons
may  send  the  bill  to  a  subcommittee. To  reject  a
bill, committee members can ignore it and simply
let  it die, a process  called “pigeonholing,” or  they
can kill the bill by a majority vote. When accepting
a  bill, a  committee  can  first  completely  rewrite  it,
make changes, or recommend that it be adopted as
is before sending it back to the House or Senate for
further  action. Committee members  and  staff are

184 CHAPTER 7: CONGRESS AT WORK

180-188 CH07S1-860053  12/1/04  2:50 AM  Page 185

How a Bill Becomes Law
How a Bill Becomes Law

1.1.

HOUSE
Representative hands bill to
clerk or drops it in hopper.
Bill given HR number.
2.2.

1.1.

2.2.

3.3.

4.4.

Refer red to House
standing committee.
Refer red to House
subcommittee.
Repor ted by
standing committee.
Rules Committee
sets rules for debate
and amendments.

1.1.

SENATE
Senator announces bill
on the floor.
Bill given S number.

2.2.

1.1.

Referred to Senate
standing committee.

2.2.

Referred to Senate
subcommittee.

3.3.

Repor ted by
standing committee.

Committee Action

Bill is placed on
committee calendar.

Bill sent to 
subcommittee for
hearings and 
revisions.

Standing committee
may recommend 
passage or kill
the bill.

Floor Action

1.1.

2.2.

House debates,
votes on passage.
Bill passes; goes to
Senate for approval.
OR
A dif ferent version passes;
goes to conference committee.

2.2.

1.1.

Senate debates,
votes on passage.
Bill passes; goes to
House for approval.
OR
A dif ferent version passes;
goes to conference committee.

Conference Action

Conference committee works out dif ferences and sends identical
compromise bill to both chambers for final approval.

House votes on compromise bill.

Senate votes on compromise bill.

Pass

Approved Bill Sent to President
President signs bill or allows 
bill to become law without signing.*

OR

President vetoes bill.
Veto

P

a
ss

LAW

Congress can override a 
veto by a 2/3 majority in 
both chambers.  If either 
fails to override, the bill dies.
s s
P a

*President can keep bill for 10 days and bill becomes law. 
If Congress adjourns before the 10 days (Sundays 
excluded), then the bill does not become law.

Critical Thinking
                              At what point in Congress is a bill most closely examined?

185

180-188 CH07S1-860053  12/1/04  2:50 AM  Page 186

Voting Electronically

Analyzing Votes The
electronic voting system in
the House displays each
representative’s name and
vote on the wall of the
chamber. Representatives
insert a plastic card in a
box fastened to the chairs
to vote “yea,” “nay,” or
“present.” When do you
think a representative
would vote “present”?

Reporting  a  Bill When  all  the  changes  have
been made, the  committee  votes  either  to  kill  the
bill or to report it. To report the bill means to send
it to the House or Senate for action. Along with the
revised bill, the committee will  send  to  the House
or Senate a written report the committee staff has
prepared. This report  is  important. It explains  the
committee’s  actions, describes  the  bill, lists  the
major changes the committee has made, and gives
opinions  on  the  bill. The  report  is  often  the  only
document available to  lawmakers or their staffs as
they  decide  how  to  vote  on  a  bill. The  committee
repor t may  recommend  passage  of the  bill  or  it
may  repor t  the  bill  unfavorably. Why  would  a
committee  report  a  bill  but  not  recommend  pas-
sage? This happens extremely  rarely. A committee
may believe the full House should have the oppor-
tunity  to consider a bill even  though  the commit-
tee does not support it.

Floor Action
The next  important  step  in  the  lawmaking
process  is  the  debate  on  the  bill  on  the 
floor of the House and Senate. Voting on the bill fol-
lows the debate. As you may recall, both houses have
special procedures to schedule bills for floor action.

186 CHAPTER 7: CONGRESS AT WORK

Debating and Amending Bills Usually, only
a  few  lawmakers  take  par t  in  floor  debates. The
pros  and  cons  of the  bill  have  been  argued  in  the
committee hearings and are already well known to
those with  a  real  interest  in  the bill. The  floor de-
bate  over  a  bill, however, is  the  point  where
amendments  can  be  added  to  a  bill  (unless  the
House has adopted a closed rule, which means no
amendments may  be  adopted). During  the  floor
debate, the bill receives  its second reading. A clerk
reads the bill section by section. After each section
is read, amendments may be offered. Any lawmak-
er can propose an amendment to a bill during the
floor debate.
Amendments  range  from  the  introduction  of
major  changes  in  a  bill  to  the  correction  of typo-
graphical errors. Opponents of the bill sometimes
propose amendments to slow its progress through
Congress or even to kill it. One strategy opponents
use  is  to  load  it down with so many objectionable
amendments that it loses support and dies. In both
the House and  the Senate amendments are added
to a bill only if a majority of the members present
approves them.
Voting on Bills After the floor debate, the bill,
including  any  proposed  changes, is  ready  for  a

180-188 CH07S1-860053  12/1/04  2:50 AM  Page 187

Seal of the U.S. Congress

vote. A  quorum, or  a majority, of the members
must be present. The House or Senate now receives
the  third  reading  of the  bill. A  vote  on  the  bill  is
then  taken. Passage  of a  bill  requires  a majority
vote of all the members present.
House and Senate members can
vote  on  a  bill  in  one  of three
ways. The first way is by a voice
vote, in which members  to-
gether  call  out  “Aye” or
“No.” The  second  way  of
voting  is  by  a  standing
vote, or  division  vote, in
which  those  in  favor  of
the  bill  stand  and  are
counted  and  then  those
opposed  stand  and  are
counted. The  roll-call  vote
is  a  voting method  in which
everyone  responds  “Aye” or
“No” as  their  names  are  called  in
alphabetical  order. The  House  also
uses a fourth method called a record-
ed vote, in which members’ votes are
recorded electronically and displayed on panels in
the House  chamber. This  last method, used  since
1973, saves  the House many  hours  of time  that  it
once took for roll-call votes in each session.

Final Steps in Passing Bills
To become law a bill must pass both houses of
Congress  in  identical  form. A  bill  passed  in  the
House of Representatives often differs at first from
a Senate’s bill on the same subject.
Conference Committee Action If one house
will not accept the version of a bill the other house
has  passed, a  conference  committee  must  work
out differences  between  the  versions. The mem-
bers  of the  conference  committee  are  called 
conferees or managers. They  usually  come  from
the House  and  Senate  committee members  that
handled the bill originally.
The  conferees  work  out  the  differences
between  the  two  bills  by  arranging  compromises.
The conference committee is supposed to consider
only  the parts of a bill on which  there  is disagree-
ment, but  sometimes  it makes  important  changes
in  the  bill  or  adds  prov isions  not  prev iously

considered  by  either  chamber. A majority  of the
members  of the  conference  committee  from  each
house  drafts  the  final  bill, called  a  conference  re-
port. Once  accepted, this bill  can be  submitted  to
each house of Congress for final action.
Presidential Action  on Bills
Article  I1 of the  Constitution
states that:
“Every Bill which shall
have passed the House of
Representatives and the
Senate, shall, before it be-
comes a Law, be presented
to the President of the
United States. . . . ”
—Article I, Section 7
After  both  houses  of Con-
gress  have  approved  a  bill  in
identical  form, it  is  sent  to  the
president. The  president may  sign
the  bill, and  it  w ill  become  law.
The president may  also  keep  the  bill  for  10  days
without signing it. If Congress is in session, the bill
will become law without the president’s signature.
Most of the time, however, presidents sign the bills
that Congress sends them.
Vetoing Bills The president  can also  reject a bill
with a veto. In a veto the president refuses to sign the
bill and returns it to the house of Congress in which
it originated, along with  reasons  for  the veto. The
president may also kill a bill passed during the last 10
days Congress  is  in  session by  refusing  to act on  it.
This veto is called a pocket veto.
Congressional Override  of  a Veto Congress
can override a president’s veto with a two-thirds vote
in both houses. If this happens, the bill becomes law. It
is usually difficult to get the necessary two-thirds vote
in both the House of Representatives and the Senate,
so Congress does not override vetoes very often.
Line-Item  Veto Presidents  since  Ronald  Rea-
gan have sought the power of the line-item veto, a

See the following footnoted materials in the Reference Handbook:
1. The Constitution, pages 774 – 799.

CHAPTER 7: CONGRESS AT WORK 187

180-188 CH07S1-860053  12/1/04  2:50 AM  Page 188

tool used  by many  state  governors. The  line-item
veto allows a leader to reject specific lines or items in
a bill while  accepting  the main body of the  legisla-
tion. Granting  a  true  line-item  veto, however, re-
quires  a  constitutional  amendment. In  1996,
Congress  avoided  this obstacle by passing  a  special
bill which gave the president some of the powers of
a line-item veto. This enhanced recision bill allowed
the president  to  veto  individual  spending  and  tax
items from bills.

law is then added to the United States Code of cur-
rent federal laws.
Tracking  Legislation  on  the  Internet An
online  information  resource  called  THOMAS,
after Thomas  Jefferson, provides access  to  current
information about all legislation being considered by
Congress. THOMAS allows you to search the full text
of all versions of House and Senate bills by either bill
number or keyword. Another section of this database
provides  the  full  text  of the  Congressional Record,
committee  reports, summaries of bills and updates
on  their  status as  they move  through  the  legislative
process, and the history of bills.
legislation  appears
Not  everything  about 
on THOMAS. Bills do not  appear  in  the database
until  they are published  in an official version by  the
Government  Printing  Office. As  a  result, drafts
of bills, committee recommendations, and the “chair-
man’s mark,” the version of a bill as it goes through a
markup session, are not available.
THOMAS was designed to open up the compli-
cated  lawmaking process  to  individual  citizens and
help offset  the power of lobbyists and  special  inter-
ests. When  Speaker  of the House Newt Gingrich
unveiled  THOMAS  at  a  1995  press  conference,
he said:
“ Knowledge is power. . . . [I]f every citizen
has access to the information that Wash-
ington lobbyists have, we will have changed
the balance of power in America towards
the citizens and out of the Beltway.”
S e c t i o n   1   A s s e s s m e n t
S e c t i o n   1   A s s e s s m e n t

Clinton v. City of New York President Clin-
ton first used the new veto power in August 1997 to
cancel  a provision  of the Balanced Budget Act  of
1997  and parts  of the Taxpayer Relief Act  of 1997.
New York  challenged  the  veto  because  it  reduced
Medicaid  funding  for  New  York  state  hospitals.
Idaho farmers also challenged the veto of a tax break
in  the  Taxpayer  Relief Act. The  Supreme  Court
ruled  in Clinton v. City of New York (1998) that the
Line Item Veto Act was unconstitutional.

Registering Laws After a bill becomes law, it is
registered with the National Archives and Records
Service. The law is labeled as a public or private law
and assigned a number that identifies the Congress
that passed  the bill and  the number of the  law  for
that  term. For example, Public Law 187 under  the
105th Congress  is  registered  as  PL105-187. This

Checking for Understanding
1. Main Idea Create a flow chart to analyze the
major stages by which a bill becomes a law.
Which stage do you think takes the longest?

Critical Thinking
5. Drawing Conclusions Is it possible for all 
members of Congress to keep abreast of all 
bills under consideration? Support your answer.

2. Define private bill, public bill, simple resolution,
rider, hearing, veto, pocket veto.
3. Identify voice vote, standing vote, roll-call vote.
4. Why do so few bills actually become laws?

Political Processes Imagine that you are
asked to help younger children learn how 
laws are made in the United States. Create 
a poster, using cartoonlike illustrations, to
show how a bill becomes a law. 

188 CHAPTER 7: CONGRESS AT WORK

189-193 CH07S2-860053  12/1/04  2:50 AM  Page 189

S e c t i o n   2
S e c t i o n   2
Taxing and Spending Bills
Today, running  the  national  government
Reader’s Guide
costs about $2 trillion a year. The Consti-
tution  gives  Congress  the  authority  to 
decide where  this money will come  from
and  in  what  ways  it  w ill  be  spent. Passing 
laws  to  raise  and  spend money  for  the  national
government  is  one  of the  most  impor tant  jobs 
of Congress. The  government  could  not  operate
successfully without money  to  carry  out  its many
programs and services.

Key Terms
tax, closed rule, appropriation, authorization bill,
entitlement
Find Out
■ What authority does Congress have over how
the national government will  raise and spend
money?
■ What  is  the procedure whereby Congress pro-
vides money  to  the executive agencies and
departments? 
Understanding Concepts
Public Policy When Congress votes to begin a
government program, what process is followed to
fund that program?

Making Decisions About Taxes
The  national  government  gets most  of the
money  it  needs  to  keep  the  government
functioning from taxes. Taxes are money that peo-
ple and businesses pay to support the government.
The Constitution states:
“ The Congress shall have the power to lay
and collect taxes, duties, imposts and ex-
cises, to pay the debts and provide for the
common defense and general welfare of
the United States. . . . ”—Article I, Section 8
The House’s Power Over Revenue Bills
The Constitution gives the House of Representa-
tives  the  exclusive  power  to  start  all  revenue
measures. Almost all important work on tax laws
occurs in the House Ways and Means Commit-
tee. The Ways  and Means Committee  decides
whether  to  go  along with  presidential  requests
for  tax  cuts  or  increases. It  also  makes  the 
numerous rules and regulations that determine
who  w ill  pay  how  much  tax. Some  of these 
rulings  are  very  simple while  others  are more
complex. This  committee, for  example, influ-
ences how much of a tax deduction parents are
allowed  on  their  income  tax  for  each  child 
liv ing  at  home. It  also  decides  what  kind  of
tax  benefit  businesses  can  claim  for  building
new factories.

CHAPTER 7: CONGRESS AT WORK 189

0

0

1

0

0

0

1

0

0

1

0
0
0
1

1000

0
0
0
1
0
0

100
0
0
1

Was te fu l  Spend ing !
WASH INGTON ,  D .C . ,   1 9 8 5  
S e n a t o r   W i l l i am   P r o x -
m i r e   aw a r d e d   t h e   Na -
t i o n a l   I n s t i t u t e s   o f H e a l t h
h i s   G o l d e n   F l e e c e   Aw a r d
f o r   a   g r a n t   i t   g a v e   a   U t a h
r e s e a r c h e r   t o   s t u d y   h e x e s
p u t   o n   a rm   w r e s t l e r s . “ I t ’s
$ 1 6 0 , 0 0 0   o f t h e   t a x p a y e r s ’
m o n e y   d ow n   t h e   d r a i n ,”
1000
1000
100
1000
P r o xm i r e   m a i n t a i n s . T h e
100
100
A rm   w r e s t l e r s
t h e
l a u n c h e d  
s e n a t o r  
G o l d e n   F l e e c e   Aw a r d   i n
1 9 7 5   to   c a l l  p u b l i c  a t t en t i on   to  w a s t e f u l  g ove r nm en t
s p e n d i n g . T h e   f i r s t   w e n t   t o   t h e   Na t i o n a l   S c i e n c e
Fo u n d a t i o n   f o r   s p e n d i n g   $ 8 4 , 0 0 0   t o   f i n d   o u t   w h y
p e o p l e   f a l l   i n   l ove . O t h e r   n o t a b l e   p a s t  “w i n n e r s” i n -
c l u d e   t h e   D e p a r tm e n t   o f Ag r i c u l t u r e   f o r   a   $ 4 6 , 0 0 0
s t u d y  o f t h e   l en g t h  o f t im e   i t   t a ke s   to  co o k  b r e a k f a s t .

100
100
1000
1000

1000
1000

100
100

100

100

100

1

100

100

189-193 CH07S2-860053  12/1/04  2:50 AM  Page 190

COMPARING 
COMPARING 
Governments
Governments
Taxes as a Percent of GDP

Sweden

Norway

Denmark

France

Finland

Austria

Belgium

Italy

Germany

New Zealand

Netherlands

Portugal

56.4%

53.7%

53.5%

49.3%

48.0%

47.3%

46.1%

46.0%

42.8%

41.2%

41.1%

41.0%

United Kingdom

40.9%

Canada

Japan

Australia

39.5%

32.3%

31.7%

United States

31.6%

Source: U.S. Bureau of the Census, 
Statistical Abstract of the United States: 
2002 (Washington, D.C.: 2002).

Critical Thinking
 
 
    All of the countries listed 
have higher tax rates than the United States. 
How many nations listed collect more than 
50% of their GDP in taxes? What do the 
countries that collect more than 50% have in 
common?

190 CHAPTER 7: CONGRESS AT WORK

For many  years  the  committee’s  tax bills were
debated on the House floor under a closed rule. A
closed  rule forbids members  to offer  any  amend-
ments to a bill from the floor. This rule meant that
only members of the Ways and Means Committee
could have a direct hand in writing a tax bill.
Other House members  accepted  this  closed-
rule  procedure  on  tax  bills  for  several  reasons.
House leaders claimed that tax bills were too com-
plicated  to  be  easily  understood  outside  the  com-
mittee. Leaders  also warned  that  representatives
could  come  under  great  pressure  from  special  in-
terests  if tax  bills  could  be  revised  from  the  floor.
Floor  amendments, they  argued, might  upset  the
fair and balanced legislation recommended by the
committee.
In  the 1970s House members  revolted against
the  Ways  and  Means  Committee. In  1973  the
House  allowed members  to   amend  a  tax  bill  on 
the  floor. In  1974  it  forced Committee Chairper-
son Wilbur Mills  to  resign  follow ing  a  personal
scandal. Critics charged that tax bills soon became
a collection of amendments written to please spe-
cial interests.
In the Senate no closed rule exists, and tax bills
often  do  become  collections  of amendments.
Many tax bills are amended so often on the Senate
floor they become “Christmas tree” bills similar to
appropriations bills that include many riders.
The Senate’s Role  in Tax Legislation All
tax bills start in the House. Article I, Section 7,1 of
the Constitution, however, says, “The  Senate may
propose . . . amendments. . . .” Because of this pro-
vision, the Senate often tries to change tax bills the
House  has  passed. As  a  result, many  people  view
the  Senate  as  the  place where  interest  groups  can
get House tax provisions they do not like changed
or eliminated.
The Senate Committee on Finance has primary
responsibility  for  dealing w ith  tax matters. Like 
the House Ways and Means Committee, the Senate
Finance  Committee  is  powerful. Although  the 
Senate  Finance  Committee  has  subcommittees,
the  full  committee  does most  of the work  on  tax
bills. As  a  result, the  chairperson  of the  Finance
Committee is an extremely important figure.

See the following footnoted materials in the Reference Handbook:
1. The Constitution, pages 774 –799. 

189-193 CH07S2-860053  12/1/04  2:51 AM  Page 191

Appropriating Money
In  addition  to  passing  tax  laws  to  raise
money, Congress  has  another  impor tant
power  over  government  spending. The  power  of
appropriation, or approval of government spend-
ing, is  a  congressional  responsibility. In Article  I,
Section 9, the Constitution states, “No money shall
be drawn from the Treasury, but in consequence of
[except  by]  appropriations made  by  law.” 1 Thus,
Congress must pass laws to appropriate money for
the  federal  government. Congress’s  approval  is
needed before departments and agencies of the ex-
ecutive branch such as the Department of Defense
or  the Federal Communications Commission  can
actually spend money.
How  Congress  Appropriates  Money
Congress  follows  a  two-step  procedure  in  appro-
priating money—an authorization bill and an ap-
propriations bill. Suppose the president signs a bill
to  build  recreational  facilities  in  the  inner  cities.

See the following footnoted materials in the Reference Handbook:
1. The Constitution, pages 774 –799. 

This first step in the legislation is an authorization
bill. An  authorization  bill sets  up  a  federal  pro-
gram  and  specifies  how much money may  be  ap-
propriated  for  that  program. For  example, one
provision of this  law  limits  the  amount of money
that can be spent on the program to $30 million a
year. The recreation bill also specifies that the De-
partment  of Housing  and Urban Development
(HUD) will  administer  the  program. HUD, how-
ever, does not yet actually have any money to carry
out the program.
The  second  step  in  the  appropriations  proce-
dure  comes  when  HUD  requests  that  Congress
prov ide  the  $30  million. This  kind  of bill  is  an 
appropr iations  bill and  prov ides  the  money 
needed  to  carry  out  the many  laws Congress  has
passed. HUD’s  request  for  the  $30  million  for 
the  recreational  facilities  w ill  be  only  one  small
item  in  the  multibillion-dollar  budget  HUD 
will send to Congress for that year. HUD’s budget,
in turn, will be part of the president’s total annual
budget  for  the  executive  branch. Each  year  the
president  presents  his  budget  to Congress. There
the  appropriations  committees  create  their  own 
appropriations  bills. Congress  might  decide  to

Managing the Nation’s Purse

Congressional Funding An
artist, commissioned by the
Works Progress Administration,
depicted California’s multi-
ethnic workforce. In the mid-
1930s, President Franklin D.
Roosevelt convinced Congress
to appropriate funds to a relief
program for the unemployed.
WPA artists created hundreds
of pieces documenting the
times. Why must agency
heads testify before Con-
gress to receive funding?

Former head of the Na-
tional Endowment for the
Arts, Jane Alexander, tes-
tifies before the Senate
Labor Committee.

CHAPTER 7: CONGRESS AT WORK 191

189-193 CH07S2-860053  12/1/04  2:51 AM  Page 192

grant  HUD  only  $15  million  to  carry  out  the
building  program. Next  year, HUD  would  have 
to  ask  for  another  appropriation  to  continue  the
program.
The  Appropriations  Committees The
House and Senate appropriations committees and
their  subcommittees  handle  appropriations  bills.
Both  the House  and  Senate  appropriations  com-
mittees  have  13  subcommittees  that  deal with  the
same  policy  areas  in
each  house. Thus, the
same  appropriations
subcommittees  in  the
House  of Representa-
tives  and  the  Senate
would 
review 
the
HUD  budget, includ-
ing  its  recreational  fa-
cility  program 
as
presented.
Every  year  heads
of depar tments  and
agencies  and  program  directors  testify  before  the
House  and  Senate  appropriations  subcommittees
about  their  budgets. During  the  budget  hearings,
these  officials  explain why  they  need  the money
they  have  requested. Each  year  agency  officials
must return to Congress to request the money they
need to operate in the coming year. In this way law-
makers have a chance to become familiar with the
federal agencies and their programs.

Appropriations  subcommittees  often  develop
close  relationships with  certain  agencies  and  pro-
jects that they tend to favor in appropriating funds.
In  addition, powerful  interest  groups  try  hard  to
influence Congress  and  the  appropriations  sub-
committees  to  give  these  agencies  all  the money
they request.
Uncontrollable  Expenditures The House
and  Senate  appropriations  committees, however,
do not have a voice in all
the  current  spending  of
the  federal  government.
By  prev ious  legislation,
some  of which  estab-
lished many  long-stand-
ing  programs, about  70
percent  of
the  money 
the  federal  government
spends  each  year  is  al-
ready  committed  to  cer-
tain  uses  and, therefore,
not  controlled  by  these
committees. These  expenditures  are  termed 
uncontrollables because  the  government  is 
legally  committed  to  spend  this  money. Such 
required  spending  includes  Social  Security  pay-
ments, interest  on  the  national  debt, and  federal
contracts  that  already  are  in  force. Some  of these
expenditures  are  known  as  entitlements because
they  are  social  programs  that  continue  from  one
year to the next.

A Social Security card

S e c t i o n   2   A s s e s s m e n t
S e c t i o n   2   A s s e s s m e n t

1.

Checking for Understanding
1. Main Idea Using a graphic organizer like the one
to the right, show the 
2.
two-step procedure that 
Congress follows when 
appropriating money.
2. Define tax, closed rule, appropriation, authoriza-
tion bill, entitlement.
3. Identify Ways and Means Committee, HUD.
4. What control does the House Ways and Means
Committee exert over presidential requests for
changes in tax laws?

192 CHAPTER 7: CONGRESS AT WORK

Critical Thinking
5. Synthesizing Information Do you think Congress
should have the power both to raise and to
spend money? Support your answer.

Public Policy Using the library or the Internet,
research the major categories of revenue and ex-
penditure in the current federal budget. Find out
what amounts of money the government plans
to raise and spend in each category. Create an
illustrated report or series of graphs and charts.

189-193 CH07S2-860053  12/1/04  2:51 AM  Page 193

Analyzing Information
T o analyze  information, you must
features with an eye to restraining any ill-con-
determine  its accuracy and
sidered or rash legislation passed by the
reliability. Biased  informa-
popularly elected House. With its smaller
tion may contain factual errors,
size, longer terms, older members,
be  incomplete, or be distorted
staggered elections by state leg-
by propaganda techniques.
islative elite, and exclusive
power to advise and consent
on treaties and nomina-
tions, the Senate was ex-
pected to act ‘with more
coolness, with more system
and with more wisdom,
”
than the popular branch.’
—from Politics or 
Principle, Sarah A. Binder
and Steven S. Smith

To analyze the information you
encounter, follow these five steps:
1. Determine the purpose and na-
ture of the information.
2. Determine if the information is
from a primary or secondary
source.
3. Evaluate the reliability of the source.
4. Determine what evidence the author presents.
5. Compare the information with other sources
to see if they support or contradict each other.

Learning the Skill

Thomas 
Jefferson

Practicing the Skill

Read the excerpt below. It defines the nature of
the Senate. Then answer the questions that follow.
“ In the classic anecdote about the origins of
the Senate, Thomas Jefferson—in France
during the Constitutional Convention—
asked George Washington about the pur-
pose of the new Senate. ‘Why,’ asked
Washington, ‘did you pour that coffee into
your saucer?’ ‘To cool it,’ Jefferson replied.
‘Even so,’ responded Washington, ‘we pour
legislation into the senatorial saucer to
cool it.’ That the Senate was intended to be
the more deliberative and reasoning of the
two chambers is well known. In designing
the Senate, the Framers chose institutional

George 
Washington

1. What subject are the authors addressing?
2. Is it a primary or secondary source?
3. Do you think the source is reliable? Why?
4. What evidence do the authors offer to support
their viewpoint?
5. What other places or sources would you check
to verify the accuracy of this article?

Application Activity
Application Activity
Look through the letters to the editor in
your local newspaper. Prepare a short report
analyzing one of the letters. Summarize 
the context of the article, the writer’s moti-
vation, point of view, and possible bias.

The Glencoe Skillbuilder
Interactive Workbook, Level 2
provides  instruction and practice
in key social studies skills.

193

194-199 CH07S3-860053  12/1/04  2:52 AM  Page 194

S e c t i o n   3
S e c t i o n   3
Inf luencing Congres s
Like  Senator  Ross, members  of Congress
Reader’s Guide
must  constantly make  difficult  decisions.
They  decide which  policies  they will  sup-
port and when to yield or not to yield to po-
litical pressures. They must also decide how to vote
on controversial issues and when to make speeches
explaining their views. In a single session, members
may  cast  votes  on  a  thousand  issues. By  their
speeches and actions they influence the direction of
government  policies  and  help  shape  the  public’s
views about a particular bill or about an  issue  that
is before Congress. Who influences the lawmakers?

Key Terms
lobbyist, lobbying
Find Out
■ How closely should  the votes of members 
of Congress  reflect  the opinions of  their 
constituents?
■ What  factors must a member of Congress
weigh when deciding whether  to support  the
views of an  interest group or of  the president?
Understanding Concepts
Political Processes What specific groups 
and individuals influence the legislators’ 
decisions? 

Influences on Lawmakers
A great many factors influence a lawmaker’s
decisions. One factor is the lawmaker’s per-
sonality. Some members of Congress, for example,
are by nature more willing to take risks when mak-
ing  a  choice. Sometimes  the  very  nature  of the
issue  determines  the  factors  that  w ill  influence
lawmakers most. For  example, on  a  controversial
issue such as the Second Amendment right to own
a gun, a lawmaker may pay attention to the voters
back home, no matter what his or her own beliefs
may be. On  issues  that have  little direct effect on
their home states or districts, most lawmakers are
likely to rely on their own beliefs or on the advice
and opinions of other lawmakers.
Congressional  staff members  also  influence
lawmakers’ decisions  in Congress. They  can  do
this  in  several ways. One way  is  by  controlling
the  information on which  lawmakers base  their
decisions. Another way is by setting the agendas
for  individual  lawmakers  and  for  congressional
committees  that may  favor  a  cer tain  point  of
view.
Thus, many  factors  affect  a  lawmaker’s  de-
cision on any given issue. Most lawmakers agree
that the most important influences on their de-
cision making  are  the  concerns  of voters  back
home, their own political parties, the president,
and special-interest groups.

Sena tor  Saves   Johnson  
WASH INGTON ,  D .C . ,  MAY 1 8 6 8
T h e   r e f u s a l   o f S e n a t o r
E dmu n d  G . Ro s s  to  s i d e
w i t h   o t h e r   S e n a t e   R e p u b l i -
c an s  h a s  s ave d  P r e s i d en t  An -
d r e w   J o h n s o n   f r om   b e i n g
r em o v e d   f r om   o f f i c e . O n l y
o n e   vo t e   s h o r t   o f w h a t   t h e y
n e e d e d   t o   c o n v i c t   J o h n s o n
o f t h e   im p e a chm e n t   ch a r g e s
b r o u g h t   a g a i n s t   h im , R e -
p u b l i c a n s ’ p r e s s u r e   o n   t h e
S e n a t o r   E dm u n d
f r om
s e n a t o r  
f r e s hm a n  
R o s s
Ka n s a s   h a d   b e e n   i n t e n s e . B y
r e f u s i n g   t o   v o t e   w i t h   3 5
o t h e r   Re p u b l i c an s , Ro s s   h a s   kn ow in g l y   p u t   h i s   S en -
a t e  c a r e e r  on  t h e  l in e . “ I  a lm o s t  l i t e r a l l y  l o o ke d  d ow n
i n to  my  o p e n  g r ave ,” h e   s a i d  o f h i s  vo t e . Po l i t i c a l  o b -
s e r v e r s   a g r e e   w i t h   t h e   s e n a t o r ’s   a s s e s sm e n t   a n d   d o
n o t   e x p e c t   h im   to   b e   r e e l e c t e d   to   a   s e con d   t e rm .

194 CHAPTER 7: CONGRESS AT WORK

194-199 CH07S3-860053  12/1/04  2:52 AM  Page 195

The Influence of Voters
The political careers of all  law-
makers  depend  upon  how  the
voters back home  feel about  lawmak-
ers’ job  performance. Only  very   un-
usual lawmakers would regularly vote
against  the  w ishes  of the  people  in
their home states or districts.
What  Voters  Expect Experi-
enced lawmakers know that their con-
stituents  expect  them  to   pay  a  great
deal  of attention  to  their  state  or  dis-
trict. Most  people  expect  their  repre-
sentatives  to   put  the  needs  of their
district  ahead  of the  needs  of the  na-
tion. What if a conflict arises between
what the lawmaker believes should be
done  and what  the  people  in  the  dis-
trict want?  In a national opinion  sur-
vey, most  people  said  their  lawmaker
should “follow what people in the dis-
trict want.”
The  voting  behav ior  of most
members  of Congress  reflects  the  re-
sults of this  survey. On  issues  that  af-
fect their constituents’ daily lives, such
as civil rights and social welfare, lawmakers gener-
ally  go  along with  the  voters’ preferences. In  con-
trast, on  issues  where  constituents  have   less
information  or  interest, such   as  foreign  affairs,
lawmakers often make up their own minds.
Voters say they want their lawmakers to follow
constituents’ wishes  on  the  issues  and  enact  laws
that reflect  their needs and opinions. Most voters,
however, do  not  take  the  trouble  to  find  out  how
their  senators  and  representatives  cast  their  votes
in Congress. Sometimes voters are not even aware
of all  the  issues  lawmakers must  decide  and  vote
on. Why, then, is  the way  lawmakers  vote   so  im-
portant to their chance of reelection?
In  an  election  campaign, the  candidate  from
the  other  party  and  opposing  interest  groups will
bring  up  the  lawmaker’s  voting  record. They may
demand  that  the  lawmaker  explain  votes  that
turned out to be unpopular back home. The oppo-
site is also true. A legislator running for reelection
may  call  attention  to   his  or  her  votes  on  certain
measures in order to attract constituents’ support.

Influencing Policy Makers

“Whose conscience are we voting today?”

Influencing Government Lawmakers represent the citi-
zens of their districts and their own political parties. At elec-
tion time, these groups will hold lawmakers accountable for
their votes. What does the cartoonist seem to be saying
about who influences a legislator’s vote?

As a result, voters who might otherwise not know
how  the  lawmaker  voted  are  told  how well  he  or
she “paid  attention  to  the  folks  back  home.” The
margin  between  a  candidate’s  victory  and  defeat
may be only a few thousand votes. Consequently, a
small  group  of voters  on  either  side—those who
were unhappy with a lawmaker’s voting record and
those who  strongly  supported  that  record—could
mean the difference between the candidate’s victo-
ry and defeat. As a result, lawmakers try to find out
what  the  voters  back  home  are  concerned  about
well before an election.
Visits  to  the  District Most  lawmakers  use
several  methods  to   try  and  keep  track  of their
constituents’ opinions. One  method  is  to  make
frequent  trips  home  to   learn  the  local  voters’
concerns. Senators  and  representatives  make
dozens  of trips  to  their  home  districts  each  year.
During  these  trips  they will  try  to   speak with  as
many  voters  as possible  about  the  issues  concern-
ing them.

CHAPTER 7: CONGRESS AT WORK 195

194-199 CH07S3-860053  12/1/04  2:52 AM  Page 196

some  groups which  are  strongly  for  him.” These
supporters also help lawmakers keep in touch with
events back home.

The Influence of Parties
Almost  every member  of Congress  is  either  a
Republican or a Democrat. Both political parties gen-
erally take stands on major issues and come out for or
against  specific  legislation. Political party  identifica-
tion is one of the most important influences on a law-
maker’s  voting  behavior. In  many  cases, knowing
which political party members of Congress belong to
will help predict how they will vote on major issues.
Party  Voting  Both Democrats  and Republicans
tend to vote with their parties on bills. In the House
of Representatives, members  vote with  their party
more than 70 percent of the time. Senators, who are
generally more independent than House members,
are less likely to follow their party’s position.
Party  voting  is much  stronger  on  some  issues
than  on  others. On  issues  relating  to  government
intervention in the economy, party members tend
to vote the same way. Party voting is also strong on
farm  issues  and  fairly  strong  on  social-welfare
issues. Party  voting  is  usually weaker  on  foreign
policy  issues because  the  two parties often do not
have fixed positions on international questions.
The  Importance  of  Parties Republicans or 
Democrats vote with  their parties because members
of each  party  are  likely  to  share  the  same  general
beliefs about public policy. As a group, Democratic
lawmakers are more  likely  than Republicans  to  favor
social-welfare  programs,
job  programs  through
public works, tax  laws  that help people with  lower
incomes, and government  regulation of business. In
general, Republican members of Congress are likely to
support  lower  taxes, less government  spending, local
and  state  rather  than  federal  solutions  to problems,
and policies that support businesses and corporations
and limit government intervention in the economy.
Another  reason  for  party  voting  is  that most
lawmakers  do  not  have  strong  opinions  about
every issue on which they vote. They cannot know
enough  about  all  the  issues  to  make  informed
decisions about every bill. Therefore, they often seek
advice on how  to vote  from  fellow party members
who know more about an issue than they do.

Voting Along Party Lines

Political Processes Political parties greatly
influence legislators’ voting decisions. How
may congressional party leaders persuade
lawmakers to support the party position?

Messages  From  Home Lawmakers also pay
attention  to  the messages pouring  into  their offices
every day. Staff members screen the lawmakers’ mail
to learn what issues concern voters the most. Not all
messages  carry  equal weight. Most  lawmakers  are
only interested in messages that come from voters in
their district or state or from interest groups of special
concern to them. The form of the message is also im-
portant. Sending an e-mail  to your  lawmaker  is one
of the easiest ways to communicate with him or her.
So  far, however, lawmakers have  ranked  e-mails as
being less important than other forms of communi-
cation. Faxes, form  letters, and preprinted postcards
are also  ranked  low. Congressional offices  rate per-
sonal letters sent through the mail as most important,
followed by visits and telephone calls.
Surveys  and  Polls Many  lawmakers  send
questionnaires  to  their  constituents  asking  for
their  opinions  on  various  issues. Increasing ly,
lawmakers  are  using  Web  sites  and  e-mail  to
regularly collect voters’ opinions about key  issues.
As  an  election  draws  near, lawmakers w ill  often
hire  professional  pollsters  to  conduct  opinion
surveys among the voters of their districts.
Key  Supporters Finally, all  lawmakers  pay
close  attention  to  the  ideas  of their  rain-or-shine
supporters—those people who work in candidates’
campaigns, contribute money, and help ensure re-
election. As one lawmaker put it, “Everybody needs

196 CHAPTER 7: CONGRESS AT WORK

194-199 CH07S3-860053  12/1/04  2:52 AM  Page 197

Other Influences on Congress
Although  voter  preferences  and  political
parties  strongly  influence  the  decisions  of
lawmakers, two  other  influences  are  often  equally
strong: the president and interest groups.

On some issues party leaders pressure members
to vote for the party’s position. Often, party leaders
support the president’s program if the president is a
member of the same party. On the other hand, lead-
ers of the opposing party may vote against the pres-
ident’s  program  and  seek  to  turn  such  opposition
into  a  political  issue. Congressional  party  leaders
such as the Senate majority leader or the Speaker of
the  House  usually  use  the  power  of persuasion.
These  leaders do not expect to get their way all the
time. But they do work hard to influence lawmakers
to support the party’s position on key issues. Gain-
ing  the  support  of party  members  is  one  of the
main jobs of a party leader. Very few issues are un-
affected by political party affiliation.

that  the  president  and  his  par ty  suppor t. Some
presidents work harder than others at gaining sup-
port in Congress, and some are more successful in
getting Congress to pass their programs.
Members  of Congress  have  often  complained
that presidents have more ways to influence legisla-
tion and policy  than do  lawmakers. Presidents can
appear on television to try to influence public opin-
ion and put pressure on Congress. In late 1990 and
early  1991, for  example, President Bush  deployed
United States  troops  to Saudi Arabia. More  than 6
months of military buildup followed, in which the
United  States  government  attempted  to  force  Iraq
out  of Kuwait. Congress  let  the  president  take  the
lead  in  responding  to  Iraq. President  Bush  took
every opportunity to express his views in the press
and on television. With growing public support for
military  action  behind  the  president, Congress
voted  to  approve  military  action  in  the  Persian
Gulf. Presidential influence, in this instance of pol-
icy making, had tremendous influence.
Presidents may also use their powers to influence
individual members of Congress. They  can  give or
withhold  support of lawmakers. In  the mid-1960s,
The  Influence  of  the  President All  presi-
for  example, Senator Frank Church of Idaho  criti-
dents  try  to  influence Congress  to  pass  the  laws
cized  President  Lyndon  Johnson’s  conduct  of the
Making a Difference While she may not be em-
ployed as a lobbyist or a
member of a political 
Making a Difference
action committee, Arlys Endres 
of Phoenix, Arizona, has already
Arlys Endres
made her mark in the hallowed
halls of Congress. In 1996, when
she was 10 years old, Endres
wrote a school report on suffrag-
ist Susan B. Anthony. Endres
later discovered that a statue
honoring Anthony and two other
suffragists, Elizabeth Cady Stan-
ton and Lucretia Mott, had been
given to Congress in 1921. This
statue was unveiled on the 
anniversary of Anthony’s birth-
day. It was then briefly dis-
played in the Capitol Rotunda
before being moved to a perma-
nent display area in the Capital
Crypt, an area on the first floor

of the Capitol below the floor of
the Rotunda. 
Endres wanted to convince 
Congress to move the statue back
to a position of prominence. She
discovered a national effort led by
female members of Congress to
raise money to reinstall the stat-
ue. Endres mailed at least 2,000
letters to round up supporters and
donations. She also went on a
door-to-door fund-raising campaign. 
In all, Endres helped raise
almost $2,000. Her efforts also
took her to Washington, D.C.,
to see the statue and speak at
a “Raise the Statue” rally. Her
campaign did not go unnoticed
by national legislators. The United
States Congress unanimously
voted to reinstall the statue in the
Capitol Rotunda in 1996.

CHAPTER 7: CONGRESS AT WORK 197

Susan B.
Anthony

194-199 CH07S3-860053  12/1/04  2:52 AM  Page 198

Vietnam War. To  support  his  viewpoint, Church
showed  President  Johnson  a  newspaper  column
written by  journalist Walter Lippmann  criticizing
the war. “All right,” Johnson said, “the next time you
need a dam for Idaho, you go ask Walter Lippmann.”
Since  the  early  1900s, many  presidents  have
tried to  increase their  influence over Congress and
the lawmaking process, and they have succeeded. In
more recent years Congress has taken steps to limit
the president’s influence, letting Congress remain a
more autonomous legislative body.
The  Influence  of  Interest  Groups The
representatives of interest groups, called lobbyists,
are  another  important  influence  on  Congress.
Lobbyists  try  to  convince members  of Congress 
to support policies favored by the groups they rep-
resent. Their efforts to persuade officials to support
their  point  of view  is  called  lobbying. The  largest
and most  powerful  lobbies  have  their  own  build-
ings and full-time professional staffs in the nation’s
capital.
Lobbyists  represent  a wide variety of interests
such as business organizations, labor unions, doc-
tors, lawyers, education  groups, minority  groups,
and  env ironmental  organizations. In  addition,
lobbyists work for groups that sometimes form to
support or to oppose a specific issue.
Lobby ists  use  various  methods  to  influence
members  of Congress. They  prov ide  lawmakers
with  information  about  policies  they  support  or
oppose. They visit  lawmakers  in their offices or  in

the lobbies of the Capitol and try to persuade them
to  support  their position. They  encourage  citizens
to write to members of Congress on the issues they
favor or oppose.
Interest  groups  and  their  lobbyists  also  focus
their  attention  on  congressional  committees. For
example, farm  groups  concentrate  their  attention
on influencing the committees responsible for laws
on  agriculture. Labor  unions  focus  their  effort  on
committees  dealing with  labor  legislation  and  the
economy.
Political  Action  Committees Some  ob-
servers believe that the importance of individual lob-
byists has declined in recent years as political action
committees, known  as PACs, have dramatically  in-
creased  in number  and  influence with  lawmakers.
PACs are political  fund-raising organizations estab-
lished  by  corporations, labor  unions, and  other 
special-interest  groups. PAC  funds  come  from  vol-
untary  contributions by  employees, stockholders,
and union members. A PAC uses its funds to support
lawmakers who favor the PAC’s positions on issues.

GOVERNMENT

Student Web Activity Visit the United States
Government: Democracy  in Action Web site at
gov.glencoe.com and click on Chapter 7–Student
Web Activities for an activity about  influencing
Congress.

S e c t i o n   3   A s s e s s m e n t
S e c t i o n   3   A s s e s s m e n t
Critical Thinking
6. Making Inferences Why do some people think
that PACs now have more influence over mem-
bers of Congress and the process of congres-
sional legislation than do individual lobbyists?

2.

1.

4.

Checking for Understanding
1. Main Idea Using a graphic organizer like the one
to the right, 
identify four ways 
lawmakers can 
keep in touch with 
voters’ opinions.
2. Define lobbyist, lobbying.
3. Identify PAC.
4. On which type of issues do lawmakers tend to
pay less attention to voter opinion?
5. What influence does the president have on 
Congress?

Lawmakers

3.

198 CHAPTER 7: CONGRESS AT WORK

Political Processes Contact a special-interest
group to request literature on the group’s pur-
pose and activities. Summarize how the group
attempts to influence legislators. Post the liter-
ature and summary on a bulletin-board display.

194-199 CH07S3-860053  12/1/04  2:53 AM  Page 199

toto

SPACE STATION: WHAT
SHOULD CONGRESS DO?

In 1984 the National Aeronautics and Space Administration proposed to build a space 
station as a long-term project that would provide valuable knowledge and be a 
way station for trips to other planets or the moon. The project provided additional 
justification for another major project, the space shuttle.

COST-CONSCIOUS GOVERNMENT
This original vision, as proposed in 1984, was
soon questioned because the government had be-
come more cost conscious. By late 1996 President
Clinton confirmed that the manned mission to Mars
project was dead. Instead, the National Aeronautics
and Space Administration began preparing a vast 
armada of robots to send to the red planet. In
1997, the first robot landed on Mars and sent back
dramatic images and extensive data. It collected
most of the data that human explorers could col-
lect, at a fraction of the cost. A human mission
would have cost $500 billion. NASA builds each of
its automated probes for far less money. Some sci-
entists argue that the original plans for a manned
space station also should be abandoned because
they are no longer relevant.

HUMANS IN SPACE
The space station is an inspir-
ing international project that will
allow the world’s most talented
space scientists to keep active
until human exploration of space
is feasible. The lucrative construc-
tion contracts from the United
States and other countries further
support pursuing a manned sta-
tion. Scientists also plan to use
the station for biological experiments. U.S.
leadership in this area would be questioned if
America withdrew from the project. There are risks,
however. In 2003, tragedy struck the shuttle
Columbia when it blew apart on re-entry into the
atmosphere, killing all seven crew members. 

Debating the Issue
Debating the Issue

WOULD YOU VOTE FOR OR AGAINST THE FUNDING BILL? 
✔ Could the same benefits be gained at less cost
Assume you are a member of Congress who
by another method?
will vote on funding for a manned space station.
✔ How will your decision affect your constituents?
Your home district has research companies that
Your nation?
might benefit from government contracts if the sta-
tion were built. However, you were elected on a
pledge to reduce unnecessary government spend-
ing. The proposed budget is for $94 billion over a
15-year period. 

Debate Discuss the issue in class. Allow time for
two people on either side of the issue to prepare
short speeches to present to the class. 

KEY ISSUES
✔ What are the benefits and costs of a manned
space station?

Vote Make your decision for or against the funding
bill. Then have the class vote and record the results.
Discuss the outcome of the vote. 

CHAPTER 7: CONGRESS AT WORK 199

200-209 CH07S4-860053  12/2/04  4:14 AM  Page 200

S e c t i o n   4
S e c t i o n   4
Helping Constituents
Representative Doggett’s  experience mir-
Reader’s Guide
rors what many seasoned lawmakers have
learned—they are expected to do more in
Washington, D.C., for  their  constituents
than debate great  issues. To be  reelected, lawmak-
ers must  spend much  of their  time  on  two  other
important  tasks. First, they must  act  as  problem
solvers  for  voters who  have  difficulties w ith  de-
partments  or  agencies  of the  federal  government.
Second, they must make  sure  that  their district or
state  gets  its  share  of federal money  for  projects
such as new post offices, highways, and contracts.
These  two  duties  are  not  new  to members  of
Congress, but  in  recent  years  these  duties  have 
become  increasingly  important. As  the  national 
government has grown, they have become a time-
consuming part of the lawmaker’s job.

Key Terms
casework, pork-barrel legislation, logrolling 
Find Out
■ Why do  legislators spend much of  their  time
helping  their constituents?
■ How do  the organization and methods of
Congress contribute  to pork-barrel  legislation?
Understanding Concepts
Federalism How does the need to weigh the 
interests of their constituents affect national policy
decisions by members of Congress? 

Chas ing  Federa l  Money
WASH INGTON ,  D .C . ,  MARCH 1 9 9 7
D i sp l ay in g   a   pho to   o f
a   f i e r y   a u t o   c r a s h  
on   In te r s t a te  35   in  dow n -
tow n   Au s t in , Tex a s , Re p -
re s en t a t ive  L loyd  Dogg e t t
c a l l e d   f o r   f e d e r a l   h e l p   i n
bu i ld ing   a   by p a s s   a round
t h e   c i t y. D o g g e t t   w a n t s
t h e   Ho u s e   to   ch a n g e   t h e
Te x a s   s t a t e   s e a l
w ay   i t   d i s t r i b u t e s   f e d e r a l
g a so l in e   t axe s   among   th e
s t a te s . Cu r ren t ly  Tex a s  re ce ive s   ju s t  77  cen t s  o f e a ch
d o l l a r   i t   co n t r i b u t e s   i n   g a s o l i n e   t a xe s . Un d e r   t h e
Tex an’s   p l an , th a t   wou ld   in c re a s e   to   9 5   cen t s . Th e
i d e a   a n g e r s   l e g i s l a t o r s   f rom   n o r t h e a s t e r n   s t a t e s ,
w h i c h   c u r r e n t l y   r e c e i v e   m o r e   o f t h e   t a x   m o n e y.
New   Yo r k   r e p r e s e n t a t i v e   Su s a n   Mo l i n a r i   t h i n k s
Tex a s  g e t s   i t s   sh a re  o f f ed e r a l  mon e y   in  o th e r  a re a s .
“ T h e   e x t r a   s i x   b i l l i o n   d e f e n s e   d o l l a r s   t h a t   g o   t o
Tex a s , k i s s   i t   good -by,” sh e   s a id .

200 CHAPTER 7: CONGRESS AT WORK

Handling Problems
All  lawmakers  today  are  involved  w ith
casework. Helping constituents with prob-
lems is called casework. One House member put
it this way, “Rightly or wrongly, we have become
the  link  between  the  frustrated  citizen  and  the
very  involved  federal  government  in  citizens’
lives. . . . We  continually  use more  and more  of
our staff time to handle citizens’ complaints.”
Many Different Requests Lawmakers re-
spond  to  thousands of requests  from voters  for
help in dealing with executive agencies. Typical
requests  include: (1) A  soldier would  like  the
Army  to  move  him  to  a  base  close  to  home 
because  his  parents  are  ill. (2)  A  local  busi-
nessperson  claims  the Federal Trade Commis-
sion (FTC) is treating her business unfairly. She
would like to meet with top FTC officials. (3) A
veteran  has  had  his  GI  life  insurance  policy
cancelled by a government agency. The agency
says  the  veteran  failed  to  fill  out  and  return  a
certain form. The veteran says he never got the
form, but  he wants  the  life  insurance. (4) A

200-209 CH07S4-860053  12/1/04  2:53 AM  Page 201

new high  school graduate would  like help  finding
a government job in Washington.
Many lawmakers complain that although vot-
ers  say  they want  less  government  they  demand
more  serv ices  from  their members  of Congress.
Sometimes  voters make  unreasonable  requests  or
ask  for help  that a  lawmaker  is unwilling  to deliv-
er. A  representative  from New York, for  example,
was asked to fix a speeding ticket. Another member
received a call asking what the lawmaker was going
to do about the shortage of snow shovels at a local
hardware store during a blizzard.
Who Handles Casework All lawmakers have
staff members  called  caseworkers to  handle  the
problems  of their  constituents. In most  instances
the caseworkers are able to handle the requests for
help  themselves. Sometimes  the  problem  can  be
solved with a simple question from a caseworker to
the  agency  involved. At  other  times, however, the
senator  or  representative may  have  to  get  directly
involved. One  representative  explained, “When
nothing  else  is working  and  the  staff feels  they’ve
had it with the bureaucracy, then I step in.”
Purposes  of  Casework Why do  lawmakers
spend  so much  of their  time  on  casework?  Law-
makers  are  involved  in  casework  because  it  serves
three  important  purposes. First, casework  helps
lawmakers  get  reelected. Lawmakers  know  that
helping  voters with problems  is part  of what  they
can do  for  the people  in  their  states  or districts. “I
learned  soon  after  coming  to Washington,” a Mis-
souri lawmaker once said, “that it was just as impor-
tant  to  get  a  certain document  for  somebody  back
home as for some European diplomat—really, more
important, because that little guy back home votes.”
As  a  result, many  lawmakers  actually  look  for
casework. One  lawmaker, for  example, regularly
sent  invitations  to  almost  7,000  voters  in  his  dis-
trict asking them to bring their problems to a town
meeting  his  staff runs. Today  lawmakers may  en-
courage voters to communicate with them by elec-
tronic mail. Many  representatives  have  vans  that
drive  through  their  districts  as mobile  offices  to
keep watch on problems back home.
Second, casework  is  one way  in which Con-
gress  oversees  the  executive  branch. Casework
brings  problems with  federal  programs  to  the  at-
tention  of members  of Congress. It  provides  op-

—Sam Rayburn

portunities  for  lawmakers  and  their  staffs  to  get  a
closer look at how well the executive branch is han-
dling such federal programs as Social Security, vet-
erans’ benefits, or workers’ compensation.
Third, casework provides a way for the average
citizen to cope with the huge national government.
In  the  years  before  the  national  government  grew
so  large, most  citizens with  a  problem  turned  to
their  local  politicians—called ward  heelers—for
help. One member of Congress explained that:
“ In the old days, you had the ward heeler
who cemented himself in the community
by taking care of everyone. Now the Con-
gressman plays the role of ward heeler—
wending his way through bureaucracy,
helping to cut through red tape and 
confusion. ”
Helping the District or State
Besides  prov iding  serv ices  for  their  con-
stituents, members  of Congress  also  try  to
bring  federal  government  projects  and money  to
their  districts  and  states. Lawmakers  do  this  in
three ways: (l) through pork-barrel legislation; (2)
through winning federal grants and contracts; and
(3) through keeping federal projects.
Public Works Legislation Every year, through
public works bills, Congress  appropriates billions 
of dollars  for  a  variety  of local  projects. These 
projects  may  include  such  things  as  post  offices,
dams, military  bases, harbor  and  river  improve-
ments, federally  funded highways, veterans’ hospi-
tals, pollution-treatment  centers, and mass-transit
system projects.
Such  government  projects  can  bring  jobs  and
money  into  a  state or district. For  example, Sena-
tor Robert Byrd’s pet project, the Appalachian Re-
gional Commission, oversaw more  than  a  billion
dollars worth  of government  spending  in  its  first
three years. Beginning in 1989, Byrd used his posi-
tion  as  chair  of the Appropriations Committee  to
transplant  federal  agencies  into  his  home  state  of
West Virginia. For  example, agencies  or  divisions
of the FBI, CIA, Internal Revenue Service, and even
the Coast Guard were moved from Washington to
Byrd’s state.

CHAPTER 7: CONGRESS AT WORK 201

200-209 CH07S4-860053  12/1/04  2:53 AM  Page 202

Protecting Their Districts

Constituent Services Although Representative Ronald Dellums, who chaired the
House Armed Services Commission, maintained that defense funds could be better
used to help the disadvantaged, when defense cuts hit close to home, he fought
them. In 1993 Dellums challenged the closing of the Alameda Naval Air Station in
his California district. Why would Dellums oppose the closing of the Alameda
Naval Air Station despite his criticism of military spending?

When  Congress  passes  laws  to  appropriate
money  for  such  local  federal  projects, it  is  often
called  pork-barrel  legislation. The  idea  is  that  a
member  of Congress  has  dipped  into  the “pork
barrel” (the federal treasury) and pulled out a piece
of “fat” (a  federal  project  for  his  or  her  district).
Sometimes such legislation draws criticism. Refer-
ring  to  Rober t  Byrd’s  project, a  Maryland  con-
gresswoman claimed she was “afraid to go to sleep
at night  for  fear of waking up  and  finding  another
agency has been moved to West Virginia.”
More  often, lawmakers  take  the “You  scratch
my back and I’ll scratch yours” approach to public
works  legislation. Believ ing  that  getting  federal
projects for the home state is a key part of their job,
they  usually  help  each  other. Such  agreements  by
two  or more  lawmakers  to  suppor t  each  other’s
bills is called logrolling.

202 CHAPTER 7: CONGRESS AT WORK

Winning  Grants  and  Contracts Lawmak-
ers also try to make sure their districts or states get
their  fair  share  of the  available  federal  grants  and
contracts which  are  funded  through  the  national
budget. A  senator  from Colorado  put  it  this way,
“If a program is to be established, the state of Col-
orado should get its fair share.”
Federal  grants  and  contracts  are  very  impor-
tant  to  lawmakers  and  their  districts  or  states.
These  contracts  are  a  vital  source  of money  and
jobs and can radically affect the economy of a state.
Every year federal agencies such as the Department
of Defense  spend  billions  of dollars  to  carry  out
hundreds  of government  projects  and  programs.
For example, when the Air Force decided to locate
a  new  project  at  one  of its  bases  in Utah, almost
1,000  jobs  and millions  of dollars  came  into  the
state. Lawmakers often  compete  for  such valuable

200-209 CH07S4-860053  12/1/04  2:56 AM  Page 203

Distributing the Pork

federal grants or contracts. For exam-
ple, several  other  states  wanted  the
Air Force project, but Utah’s lawmak-
ers won the prize for their state.
Behind  the  Scenes Lawmakers
do  not  have  the  direct  control  over
grants and contracts that they do over
pork-barrel legislation. Instead, agen-
cies  of the  executive  branch  such  as
the  Depar tment  of Defense  or  the
Department  of Labor  award  federal
grants  and  contracts. Lawmakers,
however, may try to  influence agency
decisions  in  several ways. They may
pressure  agency  officials  to  give  a 
favorable  hearing  to  their  state’s  re-
quests. Lawmakers may  also  encour-
age  their  constituents  to  write,
telephone, or  E-mail  agency  officials
in  order  to  make  their  requests  or
needs  known. If problems  come  up
when  someone  from  the  state  is  ar-
ranging  a  grant  or  contract, congres-
sional members may step in to help.
Many  lawmakers  assign  one  or
more  of their  staff members  to  act 
as  specialists  in  contracts  and  grants.
These  staff members  become  exper ts  on  how 
indiv iduals, businesses, and  local  governments 
can  qualify  for  federal  money. They  w ill  help 

Congressional Politics This 1963 cartoon illustrates
the pressures for a lawmaker to “bring home the bacon” 
to his or her congressional district. What kinds of 
projects receive “pork” handouts from Congress? 

constituents  apply  for  contracts  and  grants. The
lawmakers’ job  is  to make  sure  federal  grants  and
contracts keep coming into their state or district.

S e c t i o n   4   A s s e s s m e n t
S e c t i o n   4   A s s e s s m e n t

Checking for Understanding
1. Main Idea Using a graphic organizer like the one
below, explain how allocation of grants and con-
tracts is different from pork-barrel legislation.
Grants/Contracts
Pork
2. Define casework, pork-barrel legislation,
logrolling.
3. Identify caseworker, public works bill.
4. Why do lawmakers get involved in casework?
5. List three ways lawmakers bring federal 
projects to their states.
6. Which branch of government awards federal
grants and contracts?

Critical Thinking
7. Drawing Conclusions Why do you think the size
of the lawmakers’ staff has increased in recent
years?

Federalism Look through several editions of
your local paper to find examples of federal
money spent in your state or community. Pre-
sent your findings in the form of a radio news
broadcast. Your broadcast should explain how
the pork-barrel legislation benefited your state
or local community.

CHAPTER 7: CONGRESS AT WORK 203

204-207 DA_Bill to a Law  12/2/04  4:22 AM  Page 204

The following excerpt from TIME provides
a real-life look at the Senate deliberation of
the campaign-finance reform bill, which
sought to reduce the influence of money in 
the federal electoral process.
F or years, Senator John McCain had imagined
how the Last Battle would be fought, how 
he would be tested if campaign-finance 
reform actually came to a vote on the floor of the
U.S. Senate. Ever the rebel among his risk-averse
peers, McCain would have to do some things he 
had never been much good at, cut some corners, play
the inside game, be a dealmaker. And then, once 
he had bullied and cajoled and converted his Senate
colleagues, he would have to do something even
harder. He would have to trust them. And that's 
what finally happened when a big, messy coalition of
reformers from both political parties gathered in the
Lyndon Baines Johnson Room to decide whether to
hold hands and jump off the cliff together.
By the end of the day, the chances for the 
campaign-finance reform bill’s success looked 
considerably better; the two sides agreed to increase
the amount of hard money individuals could give
candidates and parties, and that compromise paved
the way for the historic vote to ban the unlimited
soft-money donations that parties could collect from
corporations, unions and the wealthy. By the end of
the week the Arizona Senator (McCain), his sidekick,
Russ Feingold of Wisconsin, and their merry band 
of china breakers actually had victory in sight—a 
victory that could lead to the most dramatic 
campaign-finance overhaul since the post-Watergate
reforms of 1974. [After passing votes in both Houses 
of Congress, the campaign-finance reform bill was
signed into law by President George W. Bush in
March 2002.] 
— From TIME,
April 9, 2001

From a Bill 
From a Bill 
to a  Law
to a  Law

IN CHAPTER 7 you learned that 
thousands of bills are introduced in 
Congress each year, yet only a handful
become law. In this activity, you will
take a bill through the process to create
your own law. The activity will help you
understand the lawmaking process in
both houses of Congress and demonstrate
the role that compromise plays in getting
a bill passed. You may want to reread
pages 181–188 before
you begin.

204

ROYALTY-FREE/CORBIS

204-207 DA_Bill to a Law  12/1/04  3:00 AM  Page 205

is available, provide a copy of each bill to each
member and to the witnesses who were chosen 
at the beginning of the activity.
The leader of each house should appoint 
each member to one of three committees. The
leader will give each committee one bill for which 
it will be responsible. Each committee should
choose a recorder to keep track of the progress
and changes made to the bill. Members of each 
committee should also select a chairperson 
for their committee. The chairperson will be 
responsible for organizing the agenda for the 
committee meeting, assigning tasks, presiding
over the meeting, and conducting votes.

Each committee’s task will be to:
1. hold a hearing to hear witnesses in 
favor of and opposed to the bill
2. make changes to the bill to make it 
more acceptable
3. prepare a written repor t on the 
bill and move it to the floor for 
a final vote or, if committee 
members decide that their bill 
should not be moved to 
the floor, pigeonhole the bill

▲

Senator 
John McCain

S
W
E
N
 
S
E
G
A
M
I
 
Y
T
T
E
G
/
G
N
O
W
 
X
E
L
A

Setting Up the Workshop
1 For this activity you will need pencils, paper, a
receptacle for drawing names, and access to 
a copy machine. If available, you can also use
blank transparencies and an overhead projector.
2 Use the lotter y method to divide the class into
the following three groups: 
Group 1 Witnesses to testify at hearings 
(six members)
Group 2 One-half the remainder of the class to 
be representatives and one-half to be senators 
Group 3 Three students from the Senate group
and three students from the House group to 
act as of ficial recorders to keep track of the 
wording of bills and alterations to the bills
throughout the lawmaking process

Introducing a Bill
Work as a class to develop a list of three 
proposals for change or improvements in your
classroom environment. These proposals might
deal with the arrangement of seating, the use 
of the bulletin board, orderliness of materials 
on shelves, room decorations, and so on. 
Have the recorders from the House and the
Senate write down each suggestion in the form of
a bill for that house. Number the bills appropriately
as explained in the text on page 184. 

Moving to Committee
Groups 2 and 3 Senators and representatives
should adjourn to separate areas of the class-
room. Each house should choose its leader—
Speaker of the House, and president pro tem of
the Senate. The recorders should then read the
text of their three bills out loud. If a copy machine

204-207 DA_Bill to a Law  12/1/04  3:02 AM  Page 206

Committee Action
Groups 1, 2, and 3 After the hearing, the 
committee should meet in a markup session to 
go through the bill line by line and decide what
changes should be made. Committee members
should be prepared to present their suggestions
for change in a convincing manner. Votes should
be taken on all of the changes. 
When all changes have been made, the 
committee should vote to either kill the bill or 
repor t it to Congress. To repor t the bill, the 
committee must make a written copy of the final
revised bill to send to the House or Senate and
prepare a repor t that includes the following:
1. a description of the bill
2. an explanation of the committee’s actions
3. major changes made in committee
4. opinions on the bill

Floor Action
Groups 1, 2, and 3 Once the committees 
have prepared their repor ts, the bills are ready for
floor action. The members of all three committees
should now reconvene as the Senate or House to
hold debate on each bill. The leader of each house
should preside over the debate, allowing one 
person at a time to speak. Changes (amendments)
can still be made to the bills if a majority of 
members vote to do so. 

Calling Witnesses
Groups 1, 2, and 3
The chairperson for each committee should call
for a hearing and invite one witness to present his
or her opinion on the bill. Committee members
should be prepared to ask witnesses questions
about their knowledge of the subject and reasons 
for suppor ting or opposing the bill.
Group 1 Before the hearing, the witnesses
should meet to divide up the bills being 
introduced. Each witness should be prepared 
to suppor t or oppose passage of one bill at 
the committee hearing.

S
E
V
I
T
A
T
N
E
S
E
R
P
E
R
 
F
O
 
E
S
U
O
H
 
Y
S
E
T
R
U
O
C

206

▲

A bill must be dropped into the House 
hopper to be considered for legislative 
action.

204-207 DA_Bill to a Law  12/1/04  3:03 AM  Page 207

Taking a Vote
After the debate on each bill, it is time for the
final vote. Each house should take a vote of its
members to determine if the bill will pass or be 
defeated in its amended form. A roll call of each
person’s vote should be recorded.

Conference Committee
If a dif ferent version of a bill passes in both
the House and Senate, leaders of Congress 
should organize a conference committee with three
members from each house. This committee should
iron out the dif ferences between the House and
the Senate versions of the bill and present a 
compromise to be voted on in both houses. 

Presenting the Bill
Each bill that passes through both houses
should be for warded to the president (teacher) 
for action in written
form. If the president 
vetoes a bill, the House
and Senate may vote
again to override the
veto, or let the veto
stand.

▲

A House bill

M
A
E
R
T
S
T
H
G
I
L
/
Y
E
L
T
N
U
H
 
B
O
R

Summary Activity
Summary Activity

Choose a spokesperson to read the
bills that have sur vived. On an overhead
projector, display the original form of each
bill in each house, along with the final 
versions. You may want to hold a class 
discussion on the following questions.

Questions for Discussion
1. What improvements were made 
by the changes in each bill?

2. If any of the bills were killed 
in committee, why did this happen?

3. What disagreements in your committee
were resolved by compromise?

4. How much ef fect did the testimony of
witnesses have on the final bill?

5. At what point in the lawmaking process
is a bill most likely to be changed the
most?

6. Could this system be made more 
ef ficient? How?

207

200-209 CH07S4-860053  12/1/04  2:57 AM  Page 208

GOVERNMENT

Self-Check Quiz Visit the United States Government:
Democracy  in Action Web site at gov.glencoe.com and
click on Chapter 7–Self-Check Quizzes to prepare  for
the chapter test.

C h a p t e r   7
C h a p t e r   7
Assessment and Activities
5. A person who represents a special-interest
group to Congress and other government 
officials is known as a _____.
6. Witnesses usually offer testimony in a 
committee _____ regarding a specific bill.
7. Under a _____, House members were forbid-
den to offer amendments to tax bills from 
the floor.
8. _____ is when Congress passes laws to 
appropriate money for local federal projects.
9. The president gives a _____ by not signing a bill
during the last 10 days Congress is in session.
10. _____ set up federal programs and specify
how much money may be appropriated for
those programs.
Recalling Facts
1. Describe the two types of bills that may be 
introduced and three types of resolutions that
may be passed in Congress.
2. What are four actions a president may take 
on a bill?
3. What role does the House Ways and Means
Committee play in tax legislation?
4. What factors influence lawmakers when they
consider legislation?
5. What key tool do lawmakers use to secure 
the passage of public works legislation?

Reviewing Key Terms
Fill in the blank with the letter of the correct term
or concept listed below.
f. closed rule
a. tax
g. authorization bills
b. rider
h. entitlements
c. hearing
i. casework
d. pocket veto
j. pork-barrel legislation
e. lobbyist
1. A _____ is money that citizens and businesses
pay to support the government.
2. _____ is a congressional task that involves
helping constituents with problems.
3. A _____ is an often controversial provision
tacked on to a bill pertaining to a different 
subject.
4. Interest on the national debt and Social 
Security payments are examples of _____.

Congress at Work
Money
• House of Representatives has sole
power to start revenue measures
• Congress has power to appropriate,
or approve, government spending

Constituents
• Lawmakers spend time doing
casework, helping constituents
with problems
• Lawmakers pass public works bills
to appropriate money for projects
in their home districts or states

Bills
• Bills pass through many steps
before becoming  law
• Congress considers new bills  in
committee, then debates and
votes on them
• Bills must be signed by president
to become  law; Congress can
override presidential veto with a
two-thirds vote  in both houses

200-209 CH07S4-860053  12/1/04  2:58 AM  Page 209

Understanding
Concepts 
1. Public Policy What proce-
dure is Congress s
upposed to use to fund 
its programs and 
control its expenses?
2. Political Processes Would
lawmakers’ activities be
different if there were no
special-interest groups? 

Critical Thinking
1. Making Inferences Use the
graphic organizer below to
show three characteristics
that help a bill make its
way through the lawmaking
process.

C h a p t e r   7
C h a p t e r   7

Interpreting Political Cartoons Activity

“Someone called from a Political Inaction Committee to speak to you 
on behalf of apathetic voters. He said he might call back.”

1. What is the “Political Inaction Committee” referred to in the 
cartoon?
2. How is the “Political Inaction Committee” different from other
interest groups?
3. Why is this situation unrealistic?

2. Drawing Conclusions Why is
Congress reluctant to 
appropriate the full amount
of money an agency 
requests?
Analyzing Primary Sources
During the 1930s, President Franklin D. Roosevelt
used his power as chief executive to propose a
record number of laws to deal with the Great De-
pression. In the “fireside chat” excerpted below,
Roosevelt explains why the New Deal did not take
power away from Congress. Read the excerpt and
answer the questions that follow. 

“A prompt program applied as quickly as possible seemed 
to me not only justified but imperative to our national 
security. . . . The members of Congress realized that the 
methods of normal times had to be replaced in the emergency
by measures which were suited to the serious and pressing 
requirements of the moment. There was no actual surrender
of power, Congress still retained its constitutional authority
. . . . The function of Congress is to decide what has to be
done and to select the appropriate agency to carry out its 

will. . . . The only thing that has been happening has been to
designate the President as the agency to carry out certain of
the purposes of the Congress.”

1. Where did many proposals for New Deal legisla-
tion originate, and why was this important? 
2. Why do you think the president was careful to
specify that Congress had not surrendered its
constitutional power?

Participating  in 
Local Government
Obtain a copy of a bill being
considered in your state from
your state representative or 
senator. Decide what changes 
you would suggest in the bill. Forward
these suggestions to your representative 
or senator and ask for a response.

CHAPTER 7: CONGRESS AT WORK 209

