210-219 CH08S1-860053  12/1/04  7:42 PM  Page 210

articipating
articipating
I N   G O V E R N M E N T
I N   G O V E R N M E N T
E-Mailing an Agency The
president is responsible for 
administration of hundreds 
of government agencies that 
affect people’s lives in a 
direct way. From this unit 
select a federal agency.
Find out what its main 
services are. Then survey 
people in your community 
to determine how well the
agency serves  people. Send the
results of your survey to the
federal agency via e-mail.

210

210-219 CH08S1-860053  12/1/04  7:48 PM  Page 211

▲ The Lincoln Memorial

The White House
Take a virtual tour of the White House in Washington,
D.C., and see how the executive branch works.

Glencoe’s Democracy in Action 
Video Program
The White House is 
the site of the president’s
office, the residence of the
First Family, the place where
many official social gatherings
are held, and a symbol of the
presidency. The Democracy
in Action video program “The
White House” provides an in-
side view of the White House
and the architectural
changes made throughout
its history.

Hands-On Activity
Use library or Internet resources to find 
information about the homes of past presidents.
Use multimedia tools or software to create a
multimedia presentation about historical 
residences. Incorporate images you find on 
the Internet. Include information about architectural styles,
dates of construction or renovation, unique features, and 
present condition and use. 

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

210-219 CH08S1-860053  12/1/04  7:51 PM  Page 212

Your Chief Executive In 1971, 18-year-olds
were granted the right to vote nationwide. If you
are not already eligible to vote for president, you
soon will be. This chapter presents some of the in-
formal but traditional requirements for this power-
ful office and explains how to become involved in
the selection process.

To learn more about the formal and infor-
mal powers of the presidency, view the
Democracy in Action Chapter 8 video lesson:
The Presidency
★       ★       ★       ★       ★       ★       ★       ★       ★       ★       ★       ★       ★
GOVERNMENT

Chapter Overview Visit the United States Government:
Democracy in Action Web site at gov.glencoe.com and click
on Chapter 8—Overview to preview chapter information.

210-219 CH08S1-860053  12/1/04  7:56 PM  Page 213

S e c t i o n   1
S e c t i o n   1
President and Vice President
Avice president, stepping into a president’s
Reader’s Guide
role, faces  a  daunting  assignment. Presi-
dent  Truman, assuming  the  office when
Franklin Roosevelt died, told the press:
“ I don’t know whether you fellows ever had
a load of hay fall on you, but when they
told me yesterday what happened, I felt
like the moon, the stars and all the planets
had fallen on me. ”—Harry S Truman, 1945
The  office  of the  president  has  been  develop-
ing for more than 200 years. Just as the nation has
grown  during  that  time, the  powers  of the  execu-
tive branch have also grown.

Key Terms
compensation, presidential succession
Find Out
■ What qualifications  for  the office of president
do you  think are most necessary  for carrying
out  the duties of  the office? 
■ What are  the constitutional provisions  for  filling
the executive office  if  the president  is unable
to perform  those duties?
Understanding Concepts
Growth of Democracy Why are personal qualities
of candidates for president more demanding than
the constitutional qualifications? 

Bush  F i l ls   In
WASH INGTON ,  D .C . ,  MARCH 3 0 ,   1 9 8 1
V i c e   P r e s i d e n t   G e o r g e
r u s h e d
H .W. B u s h  
b a c k   t o   Wa s h i n g t o n   f r om
Te x a s   t h i s   e v e n i n g   a f t e r
t h e s h o o t i n g   o f P r e s i d e n t
Ro n a l d   Re a g a n . B u s h   m a y
b e   r e q u i r e d   t o   a s s um e   t h e
r e s p on s i b i l i t i e s  o f t h e  p r e s -
i d e n c y, u n d e r   t h e   t e rm s   o f
t h e   Tw e n t y - f i f t h   Am e n d -
V i c e   P r e s i d e n t   B u s h
m e n t , i f R e a g a n ’s   w o u n d s
f r om   p e r -
p r e v e n t   h im  
f o rm in g   t h e   d u t i e s   o f o f f i c e . Bu s h   w i l l   f i l l   in   f o r   t h e
i n c l u d i n g   a
p r e s i d e n t   a t   t om o r r ow ’s   f u n c t i o n s ,
m e e t i n g  w i t h  l e a d e r s  o f Con g r e s s  a n d  l u n ch  w i t h  t h e
p r im e   m i n i s t e r   o f t h e   N e t h e r l a n d s . H ow e v e r, n o
s t e p s  h ave  b e e n   t a ke n   to  o f f i c i a l l y  d e s i g n a t e  h im  a c t -
i n g   p r e s i d e n t . R e a g a n   i s   r e p o r t e d   t o   b e   a l e r t   a n d
s h o u l d   b e   a b l e   to  m a ke   d e c i s i o n s   tom o r row.

Duties of the President 
The constitutional duties of the nation’s first
president, George Washington, and  those  of
a modern  president  are much  the  same. However,
presidents today have enormous power and respon-
sibility. For  example, the Constitution makes  the
president  the  commander  in  chief of the nation’s
armed forces. In Washington’s administration this
meant  calling  out  a militia  of 15,000  volunteers
and  getting on  a horse  and  leading  the  troops  to
crush  a  rebellion  of whiskey  distillers. Today  the
president  oversees  a military  div ided  into  four
major  units, makes  decisions  of how  to  deploy
troops  stationed  throughout  the  world, and
manages a defense budget of almost $400 billion.
In addition to commanding the military, the
constitution gives the president responsibility to
appoint—with Senate consent—heads of execu-
tive departments, federal court judges, and other
top  officials. In  conducting  foreign  policy, the
president  makes  treaties  w ith  the  adv ice  and
consent of the Senate, meets with heads of state,
hosts  foreign  officials, and  appoints  ambas-
sadors  to  represent  the United  States  in  other
countries.

▲

President George W. Bush

CHAPTER 8: THE PRESIDENCY 213

210-219 CH08S1-860053  12/1/04  7:57 PM  Page 214

A Traveling President

Executive Benefits The president usually
flies long distances in Air Force One. At
other times, the Chief Executive travels in 
an official car, a private airplane, or a U.S.
Navy ship. Why does the Secret Service
discourage the president’s use of public
transportation?

The most important duty of the president may
be  to  ensure  that  all  the  laws  of the United  States
are “faithfully executed.” A vast bureaucracy assists
the president in this task. A president may pardon
people convicted of federal crimes, except in cases
of impeachment, or reduce a person’s jail sentence
or fine.
The president has lawmaking power. Each year
the president delivers a State of the Union message
to Congress, in  addition  to  other messages  from
time  to  time. Today Congress  expects  a  president
to take some leadership in proposing policy changes.

President’s Term and Salary
Originally, the Constitution did not specify
how many four-year terms a president may
serve. George Washington  set  a  long-held  prece-
dent when he served for eight years and refused to
run  for  a  third  term. However, in  1940  and  1944,
Franklin D. Roosevelt broke this tradition when he
ran for a third and a fourth term.
The Twenty-second Amendment Reaction
to  Roosevelt’s  unprecedented  four  terms  in  office
and  concern  over  too much  executive  power  led
Congress  to  propose  and  the  states  to  ratify 
the  Twenty-second  Amendment in  1951.1 The
amendment  secured  the  traditional  presidential
limitation  of two  terms, while  allow ing  a  v ice 

214 CHAPTER 8: THE PRESIDENCY

president who takes over the presidency and serves
two years or  less of the  former president’s  term  to
serve  two additional  terms. Thus, it  is possible  for
a president to serve up to 10 years.
Salary  and  Benefits The  Constitutional
Convention  determined  that  presidents  should 
receive  compensation. The Constitution  did  not
specify  the  amount  of compensation, or  salary,
but  left  the  matter  for  Congress  to  determine.
Between  1969  and  2001, the  president  received
$200,000 a year in taxable salary and $50,000 a year
for  expenses  connected  w ith  official  duties. In
1999, Congress  raised  the  president’s  salary  to
$400,000, starting with the new president in 2001.
The Executive Office of the President also provides
a nontaxable  travel  allowance of up  to $100,000  a
year. Congress  cannot  increase  or  decrease  the
salary during a president’s term.
Other benefits (some that are necessary for se-
curity  reasons)  are  provided  to  the  president. For
example, Air Force One, a specially equipped jet, as
well  as  other  planes, helicopters, and  limousines
are made available to the president and close assis-
tants.
Presidents  receive  free  medical, dental, and
health care. They live in the White House, a 132-room

See the following footnoted materials in the Reference Handbook:
1. The Constitution, pages 774 –799. 

210-219 CH08S1-860053  12/1/04  7:58 PM  Page 215

Constitutional Requirements In Article II,
Section  1, the Constitution  defines  the  formal  re-
quirements for the office of president.1 The presi-
dent  must  be: (l)  a  natural-born  citizen  of the
United  States; (2)  at  least  35  years  old; and  (3)  a
resident  of the United  States  for  at  least  14  years
before taking office. The same requirements apply
to the vice president.
Government  Experience Many  other  quali-
ties are necessary for a person to have a real chance
of becoming president. Experience in government
is an unwritten but  important qualification. Since
1868, for  example, only  five major-par ty  candi-
dates  for  the  presidency  had no  previous  political
experience, w ith  Dw ight  D. Eisenhower  as  the
most  recent  example. Since  1900, candidates who
have  served  as United  States  senators  or  as  state
governors  have most  often won  the  presidential
nomination. For example, Bill Clinton had  served
as  governor  of Arkansas  and George W. Bush  as
governor  of Texas. A  political  career  provides  the
opportunity to form political alliances necessary to
obtain  a  party’s  nomination  as well  as  the  name
recognition necessary to win votes.

mansion  w ith  a  sw imming  pool, bowling  alley,
pr ivate  mov ie  theater, and  tennis  cour ts. The
White  House  domestic  staff does  the  cooking ,
shopping, and cleaning for the president’s family.
The  government pays  the  expenses of operat-
ing  the White House. Items  the  government  does
not pay for, however, can amount to thousands of
dollars each month. The cost of all personal enter-
tainment, such  as  receptions  and  dinners  not  di-
rectly  related  to  government  business, is  paid  by
the president.
When presidents  retire, they  receive a  lifetime
pension, now $148,400 a year. They also have  free
office  space, free  mailing  serv ices, and  up  to
$96,000 a year for office help. When presidents die,
their spouses are eligible for a pension of $20,000 a
year. While these benefits offer financial security to
the president and his family, money is not the rea-
son that people seek the presidency.
Presidential Qualifications
The Constitution  sets  basic  qualifications
for  president. Other  qualifications  reflect
personal  qualities  expected  of presidents. Most
Americans over the age of 35 can meet the consti-
tutional requirements for the presidency. Very few
See the following footnoted materials in the Reference Handbook:
1. The Constitution, pages 774 –799. 
can meet the informal requirements.
Making a Difference In 1996 Eugene Lang received
the nation’s highest civilian
honor—the Presidential Medal
Making a Difference
of Freedom. President Clinton
presented the award to Lang 
Eugene M. Lang
and 10 other Americans for their
outstanding contributions. 
Lang received the award for
fulfilling dreams. In 1981 Lang
went back to his elementary
school in East Harlem for a visit.
He made the sixth-grade students
at the school a promise: if they
finished high school, he would
pay for their college
educations. The 
motivation worked.

Seventy-five percent of the class
graduated or received their equiv-
alency certificates.
Lang started the “I Have a
Dream” Foundation in 1986. It 
is a program that provides money
to underprivileged children to 
attend college. The program also
offers mentoring and tutoring 
opportunities for students in
need. Today the “I Have a
Dream” program has spread to
59 cities and includes more than
15,000 students whose dreams
of going to college will become a
reality, thanks to Eugene Lang’s
contributions.

CHAPTER 8: THE PRESIDENCY 215

210-219 CH08S1-860053  12/1/04  8:01 PM  Page 216

Importance of Money Running for the pres-
idency  demands  large  amounts  of money  from
supporters and also requires using one’s own per-
sonal  finances. Paying  for  television  time, hiring
campaign  staff and  consultants, and  sending  out
mailings add up to tens of millions of dollars. The
Bipartisan Campaign Reform Act of 2000 is an ef-
fort to reform campaign fund raising. This act ad-
justs  limits  on  the  amount  of money  candidates
may receive from individual donors and the man-
ner  in  which  political  par ties  may  spend  funds
during  the  election. Candidates may  spend  up  to
$33.78 million  in  the primaries  and  an  additional
$67.56 million in the general election. If the candi-
dates  spend more  than  this, they  lose millions  of
dollars  in  federal matching  funds. Campaign  fi-
nance reform is an ongoing issue being debated in
Congress and reviewed by the Supreme Court.
Political  Beliefs Because  extremely  liberal  or
conservative candidates have little chance of being
elected, the major parties usually choose presiden-

Presidential Summer Camp If you
can’t take the heat . . . head for Camp David!
The summer retreat offers presidents and
special dignitaries a place to relax and
escape the summer heat. Franklin D.
Roosevelt was the first president to stay in
this camp located in the mountains of
Mar yland. The public is not allowed on the
grounds, which are run by the navy and
protected by the marines. Its 
attractions include a pool, a 
driving range, tennis courts,
a gym, and guest cabins.
Camp David has been the 
site of such historic events as 
the planning of the Normandy 
invasion and discussions of the 
Bay of Pigs invasion.

216 CHAPTER 8: THE PRESIDENCY

GOVERNMENT

Student Web Activity Visit the United States
Government: Democracy  in Action Web site at
gov.glencoe.com and click on Chapter 8—Student
Web Activities for an activity about the president
and vice president.

tial  candidates who  hold moderate  positions  on
most  issues. Exceptions  do, however, sometimes
occur. In  1964  Barry Goldwater, a  very  conserva-
tive  Republican, became  his  par ty’s  presidential
candidate. In 1972 a very liberal Democrat, George
McGovern, won  the  nomination. Both  of these
candidates were  soundly  defeated  in  the  general
election. In  the  2000  campaign  both  candidates,
Al Gore  and George W. Bush, adopted moderate
positions on major issues.
Personal  Characteristics What  personal
characteristics does a person need to become pres-
ident? Most  presidents  have  come  from  northern
European  family  backgrounds. A  few  have  been
from poor families (Abraham Lincoln and Harry S
Truman, for example) and a few from wealthy ones
(both Theodore  and Franklin Roosevelt  and  John
F. Kennedy). Most presidents, however, have come
from middle-class backgrounds.
Presidents generally have been white, married,
Protestant, financially  successful men. No woman
nor  any  person  of African, Hispanic, or Asian  an-
cestry  has  yet  been  president  or  vice  president. In
1960  John  F. Kennedy  became  the  first  Roman
Catholic  to win  the  office. Geraldine  Ferraro, De-
mocratic candidate  for vice president  in 1984, was
the  first woman  nominated  by  a major  party  for
high office. Jesse Jackson, an African American, won
the support of many delegates at the 1988 Democ-
ratic  convention. Another African American, Colin
Powell, former general and member of the Clinton
and  Bush  administrations, has  been  sought  as  a
candidate by both major parties in recent elections.
Personal  Growth Holding  presidential  office
tends  to  underscore  a  person’s  inner  personal
strengths  and weaknesses. President Harry  S  Tru-
man, who had succeeded to the presidency on the
death  of Franklin Roosevelt, explained  the  loneli-
ness of the office:

210-219 CH08S1-860053  12/1/04  8:02 PM  Page 217

“ The presidency of the United States carries
with it a responsibility so personal as to be
without parallel. . . . No one can make 
decisions for him. . . . Even those closest to
him . . . never know all the reasons why he
does certain things and why he comes to
certain conclusions. To be President of the
United States is to be lonely, very lonely at
times of great decisions. ”—Harry S Truman
Truman, however, grew  into  the  office  and
took responsibility  for  the difficult decisions. One
motto  on  his White House  desk  read: “The  Buck
Stops Here.”

Presidential Succession 
Eight presidents have died in office—bullets
struck down four; four died of natural caus-
es. After  John  F. Kennedy was  killed  in  1963, the
country  realized  that  the  rules  for  presidential
succession the Constitution  established were  in-
adequate.1 The nation needed a new set of rules to
determine who would  fill  the  president’s  office  in
case of a vacancy.
Order  of  Succession Ratified  in  1967, the
Twenty-fifth Amendment established the order of
succession  to  the presidency and  spelled out what
happens when the vice presidency becomes vacant:
“ Section 1. In case of the removal of the
President from office or of his death or res-
ignation, the Vice President shall become
President.

Section 2. Whenever there is a vacancy in
the office of the Vice President, the President
shall nominate a Vice President who shall
take office upon confirmation by a majority
vote of both Houses of Congress. ”
—Twenty-fifth Amendment, 1967
The amendment was first applied in 1973 after
Spiro Agnew resigned as Richard Nixon’s vice pres-
ident. President  Nixon  then  nominated  Gerald

See the following footnoted materials in the Reference Handbook:
1. The Constitution, pages 774 –799. 

Line of Presidential 
Line of Presidential 
Succession
Succession
Vice President
Speaker of the House
President pro tempore of the Senate
Secretary of State
Secretary of the Treasury
Secretary of Defense
Attorney General
Secretary of the Interior
Secretary of Agriculture
Secretary of Commerce
Secretary of Labor
Secretary of Health and Human Services
Secretary of Housing and Urban Development
Secretary of Transportation
Secretary of Energy
Secretary of Education
Secretary of Veterans Affairs
Secretary of Homeland Security*
*The order of this position may change, pending 
congressional legislation.
Source: thomas.loc.gov.

Critical Thinking
                               The Succession Act of 
1947 established the order of succession if the 
offices of president and vice president were 
vacant at the same time. What officer would 
be next in line if these two top executive 
offices were vacant at the same time?

Ford as vice president, and Congress approved the
nomination. Less than a year later, when President
Nixon  resigned  from  office, Vice   President  Ford
became  president. Ford   then  nominated Nelson
Rockefeller, former  governor of New York, as  vice
president, and Congress again approved the nom-
ination. This  process  marked  the  only  time  in
United  States  history  that  both  the  president  and
vice president were not elected to these offices.
What would happen if the offices of president
and vice president both became vacant at the same
time?  The  Succession Act  of 1947  established  the
order of presidential  succession. According  to  this

CHAPTER 8: THE PRESIDENCY 217

210-219 CH08S1-860053  12/1/04  8:03 PM  Page 218

Next  in Line

Presidential Vacancy
On March 30, 1981, John
Hinckley, Jr., attempted 
to assassinate President
Ronald Reagan. Vice Pres-
ident George H.W. Bush
took charge during Rea-
gan’s subsequent surgery.
Why is an official presi-
dential line of succes-
sion needed?

law, the next in line for the presidency is the Speak-
er of the House. The president  pro  tempore of the
Senate follows the Speaker. Next in line are the cab-
inet  officers, starting w ith  the  secretary  of state.
The other 14 department heads follow in the order
in which Congress created the departments.
Presidential  Disability What  happens  if a
president  becomes  seriously  disabled while  in  of-
fice? Several presidents were not able to fulfill their
responsibilities. President  James Garfield  lingered
between life and death for 80 days after he was shot
in  1881. During  that period, no one was officially
designated to take on the duties of the president. A
stroke disabled President Woodrow Wilson in Oc-
tober 1919. During his recovery, Mrs. Wilson often
performed his duties. In 1955 President Dwight D.
Eisenhower’s heart attack completely disabled him
for  several  days. For  a  few months  after  that, he
could  do  only  a  limited  amount  of work. During
his illness Eisenhower’s assistants ran the executive
branch  while Vice  President Nixon  stood  in  for
him on ceremonial occasions.
The  Twenty-fifth Amendment  sets  forth  a  se-
ries  of rules  to  be  followed when  a  president  be-
comes disabled. The amendment provides that the
vice president becomes acting president under one
of two conditions. First, the vice president assumes

218 CHAPTER 8: THE PRESIDENCY

the president’s duties if the president informs Con-
gress  of an  inability  to  perform  in  office. Second,
the  amendment  says  that  the  v ice  president w ill
take over for the president if the vice president and
a majority  of the  cabinet  or  another  body  autho-
rized by law informs Congress that the president is
disabled. This second provision would take effect if
a disabled president was unwilling or unable to in-
form Congress that he or she could not continue to
carry out presidential duties.
Under  the  terms  of the  Twenty-fifth Amend-
ment, the  president  can  resume  the  powers  and
duties  of office  at  any  time  simply  by  informing
Congress that a disability no longer exists. If, how-
ever, the vice president and a majority of the cabi-
net or other body authorized by law contends that
the president has not sufficiently recovered to per-
form  properly, Congress must  settle  the  dispute
within 21 days. Unless Congress decides in the vice
president’s  favor  by  a  two-thirds  vote  in  each
house, the president may resume office.

The Vice President’s Role 
The Constitution  gives  the  v ice  president
only  two  duties. First, the  v ice  president
presides over  the Senate and votes  in  that body  in
case of a tie. Most vice presidents spend very  little

210-219 CH08S1-860053  12/1/04  8:03 PM  Page 219

time  in  this  job. Second, under  the  Twenty-fifth
Amendment, the  v ice  president  helps  decide
whether the president is disabled and acts as pres-
ident should that happen.
Fourteen  vice  presidents  have  become  presi-
dent. Of these, nine vice presidents have succeeded
to  the  office  upon  the  death  or  resignation  of the
president. Some  have  done  so  under  difficult  cir-
cumstances. Harry S Truman became president in
1945, near the end of World War II, when Franklin
D. Roosevelt died in office.
Modern  Responsibilities A  vice  president’s
work  and  power  depend  upon  what  responsi-
bilities,
if any, the  president  assigns. Huber t
Humphrey, Lyndon Johnson’s vice president, once
said, “The  only  authority  he  [the Vice  President]
has is what the President gives him. He who giveth
can taketh away.”
The  presidents  before  Eisenhower  (1953-
1961)  usually  ignored  their  vice  presidents. Since
Eisenhower, however, presidents have tried to give
their vice presidents more responsibility. Vice pres-
idents today often participate in policy discussions
and  special  assignments  such  as making  speeches
defending the president’s policies. In addition, they
are involved in diplomatic activities such as repre-
senting  the president overseas. Vice presidents  are
also members of the National Security Council.
Vice  President  Richard  Cheney  has  greater
responsibilities  than  most  prev ious  v ice  presi-
dents. Cheney  consults with  President  Bush  and

Executive Powers Vice President Cheney began
his duties as chair of the George W. Bush admin-
istration’s transition team. John Adams once 
said, “I am Vice President. In this I am nothing,
but I may be everything.” What did he mean?

frequently represents him in meetings with impor-
tant  cabinet  members, lawmakers, and  foreign
dignitaries. Cheney has also led groups developing
new  policies  in  key  areas  such  as  energy. One
senator  reported  the  president  as  saying, “When
you’re  talking  to Dick  Cheney, you’re  talking  to 
me. When Dick Cheney’s talking, it’s me talking.”

Checking for Understanding
1. Main Idea Using a graphic organizer like the one
below, show three constitutional requirements
and three informal requirements of a president.
Constitutional
Informal

S e c t i o n   1   A s s e s s m e n t
S e c t i o n   1   A s s e s s m e n t
Critical Thinking
5. Drawing Conclusions Why do you think presi-
dential candidates who represent moderate
views usually win elections?

1.
2.
3.
2. Define compensation, presidential succession.
3. Identify Twenty-second Amendment, Twenty-fifth
Amendment.
4. Who are the first four officers in the line of 
succession to the presidency?

Growth of Democracy Conduct a survey using
the following questions: In your opinion, when
will the United States have its first female presi-
dent? Its first minority president? Tabulate the
results on graphs and display them in class.

CHAPTER 8: THE PRESIDENCY 219

220-227 CH08S2-860053  12/1/04  6:50 PM  Page 220

S e c t i o n   2
S e c t i o n   2
Electing the President
John Quincy Adams was chosen by the House
Reader’s Guide
as the sixth president. Initially, at the Consti-
tutional Convention, the Founders proposed
that Congress choose the president without a
popular or an electoral vote. They gave up the idea
because  it  violated  the  principle  of separation  of
powers making  it  possible  for Congress  to  domi-
nate the presidency.
Direct  popular  vote  was  another  possible
method  for  electing  the  president. Many  of the
Founders, however, feared  that  citizens  could  not
make a wise choice because they knew little about
potential  leaders. There  was  no  national  news
media, radio, or television. In addition, some lead-
ers  believed  that  the  most  popular  candidates
might not be the best presidents.
After weeks of debate, the Founders settled on
a  compromise  that  Alexander  Hamilton  intro-
duced. This  compromise  set  up  an  indirect
method  of election  called  the  Electoral College.
With a few changes, that system is still in use today.

Key Terms
elector, electoral vote
Find Out
■ What evidence suggests  that  the Founders did
not anticipate  the effects of political parties on
presidential elections?
■ Based on  the historical  record of elections,
how well has  the Electoral College performed  in
selecting presidents  the nation wanted? 
Understanding Concepts
Constitutional Interpretations How has the
method of electing a president changed to make
the process more democratic?

House  Chooses  Pres iden t  
WASH INGTON ,  D .C . ,  D ECEMBER 1 8 2 4  
G e n e r a l  
A n d r e w
J a c k s o n   h a s   w o n
t h e   p o p u l a r   p r e s i d e n -
t i a l   v o t e , b u t   h i s   9 9  
e l e c t o r a l   v o t e s   a r e   n o t
t h e
t o   w i n  
e n o u g h  
h i g h e s t  o f f i c e . T h e  e l e c -
t o r s , d i v i d e d   am o n g
f o u r   c a n d i d a t e s , g i v e
J a c k s o n   c am p a i g n   b o x
n o   o n e   t h e   e l e c t i o n .
T h e   H o u s e   o f R e p r e -
s e n t a t ive s  w i l l  n ow  b e  a s ke d   to  ch o o s e   t h e  p r e s i d e n t .
I t   i s   l i ke l y   t h e i r   ch o i c e  w i l l   b e   b e tw e en  G en e r a l   Ja c k -
s o n  a n d  Jo h n  Q u i n c y  Ad am s  o f Ma s s a chu s e t t s . Ja c k -
s o n   f e e l s   c o n f i d e n t   t h a t   t h e   H o u s e   w i l l   m a k e   h im
p r e s i d e n t . M a n y   o b s e r v e r s , h ow e v e r, b e l i e v e   t h a t
Ho u s e  S p e a ke r  Hen r y  C l ay  co u l d  sw ay  e n o u g h  vo t e s
to   g ive  Ad am s   t h e   o f f i c e .

220 CHAPTER 8: THE PRESIDENCY

The Original System
Article II, Section 1,1 established the Elec-
toral College. It  provided  that  each  state
would choose electors according to a method the
state legislatures set up. Each state would have as
many electors as it had senators and representa-
tives  in Congress. At  election  time, the  electors
would meet in their own states and cast votes for
two  presidential  candidates. This  vote was  the
electoral vote. No popular vote was cast for the
early presidential elections.
Electoral votes from all the states would be
counted in a joint session of Congress. The can-
didate  receiv ing  a  majority  of the  electoral
votes would  become  president. The  candidate
receiving  the  second  highest number  of votes,
who  also  had  a majority, would  become  vice

See the following footnoted materials in the Reference
Handbook:
1. The Constitution, pages 774 –799. 

220-227 CH08S2-860053  12/1/04  6:50 PM  Page 221

president. In  case  of a  tie, or  if no  one  received  a
majority, the  House  of Representatives  would
choose  the  president  or  vice  president, with  each
state having one vote.
As  expected, the  Electoral  College  unani-
mously  chose  George  Washington  as
the  nation’s  first  president  in  1789
and  1792. After  President Wash-
ington  retired, however, politi-
cal  par ties  began  to  play  an
impor tant  role  in  national
elections. Political  par ties
had  an  unexpected  and
profound  impact  on  the 
Electoral College system.

Fan endorsing 
Thomas Jefferson 
in 1800

The Impact of 
Political Parties
By 1800  two national parties—the Federal-
ists and  the Democratic-Republicans—had
formed. Each  party  nominated  its  own  candidate
for  president  and  vice  president. Each  party  also
nominated candidates for electors in every state. It
was  understood  that  if they  were  chosen, these
electors would vote for their party’s candidates.
In the election of 1800, the Democratic-Repub-
licans won  a majority of electoral  votes. As  agreed,
each Democratic-Republican  elector  cast  one  vote
for  each  of the party’s  candidates—Thomas  Jeffer-
son  and Aaron Burr. While most  electors wanted
Jefferson  as  president, both  Jefferson  and  Burr
wound up with 73 votes. Because of the tie, the elec-
tion went to the House of Representatives.
The opposing party, the Federalists, controlled
the House  of Representatives. Popular  opinion  in
the nation supported Jefferson, but many Federal-
ists in the House favored Burr. The House debated
day  and night  for  six days. Thirty-six ballots were
taken before Jefferson was finally elected president
and Burr vice president. The 1800  election  clearly
demonstrated  the  need  for  a  change  in  the  rules
before the next election.
The  Twelfth Amendment was  added  to  the
Constitution  in  1804  to  solve  the  problem. It  re-
quires  that  the  electors  cast  separate  ballots  for
president and vice president. The amendment also
provides that if no candidate receives a majority of
the  electoral  votes, the House  chooses  from  the

The First President

Political Symbols Frederick Kemmelmeyer
created this reverential painting to honor Wash-
ington, our nation’s only unanimously elected
president. What symbols did the artist use
in this painting and how do you think he
viewed Washington?

three  candidates who  have  the  largest  number  of
electoral  votes. If no  candidate  for  vice  president
gets a majority of electoral votes, the Senate choos-
es from the top two candidates for vice president.
In  the 1820s  states began  to place presidential
candidates  on  the  ballot. Since  then  political  par-
ties  have  chosen  electors  by  popular  vote. Parties
also  changed  their method  of nominating  presi-
dential  candidates, giv ing  the  people  more  of a
voice. The Electoral College system adapted to the
growth of democracy.

The Electoral College 
System Today
The Electoral College  is  still  the method of
choosing  the  president  and  vice  president.
Par ties  choose  their  nominees  for  president  in
conventions held  in  late summer. Voters cast  their

CHAPTER 8: THE PRESIDENCY 221

220-227 CH08S2-860053  12/1/04  6:51 PM  Page 222

The Electoral College System
The Electoral College System
Pres ident ia l E lect ion Year
Tuesday after first Monday in November
Voters cast ballots for a slate of electors pledged to a 
par ticular presidential candidate.

Monday after second Wednesday in December
Winning electors in each state meet in their state capitals 
to cast their votes for president and vice president.

Statement of the vote is sent to Washington, D.C.

January 6
Congress counts electoral votes. A majority of electoral 
votes is needed to win (270 out of 538).

January 20
Candidate receiving majority of electoral votes is sworn in 
as president of the United States.

Pres idents E lected Who Lost the Popu lar Vote

President
John Q. Adams*
Rutherford B. Hayes**
Benjamin Harrison
George W. Bush

Electoral 
Vote
84
185
233
271

Popular 
Vote
113,122
4,034,311
5,443,892
50,456,002

Opponent
Andrew Jackson
Samuel J. Tilden
Grover Cleveland
Albert Gore

Electoral 
Vote
99
184
168
266

Popular 
Vote
151,271
4,288,546
5,534,488
50,999,897

* Clay and Crawford also received electoral votes. The
election was determined in the House of Representatives.
Source: Atlas of U.S. Presidential Elections: http://uselectionatlas.org.

** Hayes was awarded the disputed electoral 
votes of three states by a special commission.

Critical Thinking
                             The writers of the Constitution chose the electoral college system as a 
compromise between selection by Congress and election by popular vote. How many weeks pass 
between a presidential election and inauguration? Is this much time necessary? Why?

ballots  for president  every  four  years  (1992, 1996,
2000, etc.) on the Tuesday after the first Monday in
November. While the candidates’ names are print-
ed on  the ballot, the voters are not actually voting
directly  for  president  and  vice  president. Rather,
they  are  voting  for  all  of their  party’s  electors  in
their state. In December these electors will cast the
official vote for president and vice president. Thus,

a  vote  for  the Democratic  candidate  is  actually  a
vote for the Democratic electors, and a vote for the
Republican  candidate  is  a vote  for  the Republican
electors.
The Electoral College  includes  538  electors—a
number  determined  by  the  total  of House  and 
Senate members plus 3 for the District of Columbia.
Each  state has  as many  electors  as  it has  senators 

222 CHAPTER 8: THE PRESIDENCY

220-227 CH08S2-860053  12/15/04  3:29 PM  Page 223

and  representatives  in Congress. Wyoming with  1
representative  and  2  senators has  3  electoral  votes.
California, the most populous  state, with 53  repre-
sentatives and 2  senators, has 55  electoral votes. To
be  elected president  or  vice president, a  candidate
must win at least 270 of the 538 votes. The Electoral
College  is  a winner-take-all  system with  the  excep-
tion of Maine and Nebraska. The party whose can-
didate  receives  the  largest popular vote  in any  state
wins  all  the  electoral  votes  of that  state  even  if the
margin of victory is only one popular vote.
The winning  presidential  candidate  is  usually
announced  on  the  same  evening  as  the  popular
election because popular-vote counts indicate who
won  each  state. The  formal  election  by  the  Elec-
toral College, however, begins on the Monday fol-
lowing  the  second Wednesday  in December when
the electors meet in each state capital and cast their
ballots. The  electoral  ballots  from  each  state  are
sealed and mailed to the president of the Senate for
a formal count. On January 6 both houses of Con-
gress meet in the House of Representatives to open
and count  the ballots. Congress  then officially de-
clares the winner president.
Most  states  do  not  legally  require  electors  to
vote for the candidate who wins the popular vote,
but electors usually do so. A few electors, however,
have  ignored  this  tradition. In  1976  an  elector

from  the  state  of Washington  voted  for  Ronald
Reagan, even though Gerald Ford had won the ma-
jority of popular votes in the state. In 2004, an elec-
tor  from Minnesota  voted  for  John  Edwards, the
Democratic  vice-presidential  candidate, for  both
president  and  vice  president. Over  the  years, nine
other electors have broken with custom.

Electoral College Issues
The  Electoral College  system works well  in
most elections. However, the call for reform
is heard after every closely contested election. Crit-
ics  point  to  three major weaknesses  in  the  system
that could affect the outcome of an election.

Winner  Take  All In  all  but  two  states  (Maine
and  Nebraska), if a  candidate  w ins  the  largest
number  of popular  votes, that  person  receives  all
the  state’s  electoral  votes. Critics  argue  that  this
system  is  unfair  to  those who  voted  for  a  losing
candidate. For example, in 1992 more  than 2 mil-
lion Texans voted for Bill Clinton, but Clinton did
not receive any of Texas’s electoral votes.
The winner-take-all  system makes  it  possible
for  a  candidate  who  loses  the  popular  vote  to 
win  the electoral vote. This usually happens when

Electing Your President 
Y oung people are less likely to vote than any
other age group. However, Music Television
(MTV) and Rock the Vote hope to draw more
young voters into the political process.
Rock the Vote is a nonprofit organization dedi-
cated to educating and involving young people. It
conducts voter registration drives at rock concerts
and on rock radio stations. It can even register you
to vote over the Internet.
During presidential campaigns, Rock the Vote
and MTV distribute a free election guide for young
voters at record stores across the nation. MTV
also airs a voter education series called Choose or
Lose. MTV personalities interview the candidates
about issues of interest to young voters. Televised

MTV forums allow young
people to express their con-
cerns directly to the candi-
dates. MTV Online makes
election information avail-
able on the Internet. The pres-
idential candidates have Internet home pages that
you also can contact for information.

MTV logo

articipating
articipating
I N   G O V E R N M E N T  
I N   G O V E R N M E N T  

A C T I V I T Y
A C T I V I T Y

Measuring Success How successful was Rock
the Vote  in  the  last presidential election? Gather
information  through magazine articles  in Readers’
Guide  to Periodical Literature. Create a graphic
using your  findings. 

223

220-227 CH08S2-860053  12/1/04  6:51 PM  Page 224

25 Electoral Votes at Stake

of the votes. The third party could
then  bargain  to  release  electoral
votes  to  one  of the  two  major-
party candidates.
Some  people  say  Governor
George Wallace of Alabama wanted
to  use  this  tactic  in  the  1968  elec-
tion. Wallace  ran  as  the American
Independent Party’s  candidate  and
won 5  states  and 46  electoral  votes.
The  election  between  Republican
Richard Nixon  and Democrat Hu-
bert  Humphrey  was  very  close,
with Nixon winning by only  about
500,000 
If
votes.
popular 
Humphrey had beaten Nixon  in  a
few more  states, Nixon would not
have won a majority of the electoral
votes. Then, unless Wallace’s  elec-
tors  voted  for Nixon, the  election
would  have  gone  to  the House  of
Representatives.
Election by the House When
the House of Representatives must
decide  a presidential  election, each
state  casts  one  vote. The  candidate
who receives 26 or more of the votes is elected.
Election  by  the  House  involves  three  prob-
lems: (l)  States  w ith  small  populations, such  as
Alaska  or Nevada, have  as much weight  as  states
with  large populations, such as New York or Cali-
fornia. (2) Under  the  rules, if a majority of repre-
sentatives from a state cannot agree on a candidate,
the state loses its vote. (3) If some members of the
House  favor  a  strong  third-par ty  candidate, it
could  be  difficult  for  any  candidate  to  get  the  26
votes needed to win.
Ideas  for  Reform People  usually  criticize  the
Electoral College system whenever problems arise.
Many  changes  to  the  system  have  been  proposed.
One  idea  is  to  choose  electors  from  congressional
districts. Each state would have two electoral votes,
plus one vote for each congressional district in the
state. The  candidate winning  the most  votes  in  a
congressional district would win the electoral vote
in  that  district. The  candidate winning  the most
districts  in  a  state would, in  addition, receive  the
two statewide electoral votes.

Recounting Ballots Broward County, Florida, election workers
scrutinize ballots during the presidential contest of 2000. The race
was so close that election officials in several Florida counties manu-
ally recounted the ballots to make sure that the count was accu-
rate. Who selects the president and vice president if no
candidate receives a majority of the electoral votes?

a  candidate  w ins  several  large  states  by  narrow 
margins. Four  times  in American  history—in  the
elections of John Quincy Adams  in  1824, Ruther-
ford B. Hayes in 1876, Benjamin Harrison in 1888,
and George W. Bush  in 2000—the  candidate who
lost the popular vote won the election. In the 2000
election, for  example, Democrat  Al  Gore  won
about  500,000 more  popular  votes  than  Republi-
can George W. Bush. Bush, however, received  271
electoral  votes  to  266  for Gore. The  1960  election
almost  became  another  example. Democrat  John
Kennedy  defeated Republican Richard Nixon  in  a
very close popular vote. Kennedy won Illinois and
Texas by a narrow margin of about 1 percent of the
popular  vote. If Nixon  had  won  these  states, he
would have won  the election by winning  the elec-
toral vote while narrowly losing the popular vote.
Third-Party Candidates When a third-party
candidate is a strong presidential contender, other
problems can arise. A third-party candidate could
w in  enough  electoral  votes  to  prevent  either
major-party  candidate  from  receiving  a majority

224 CHAPTER 8: THE PRESIDENCY

220-227 CH08S2-860053  12/15/04  1:35 AM  Page 225

Another  plan  proposes  that  the  presidential
candidates would win  the  same  share  of a  state’s
electoral vote as they received of the state’s popular
vote. If a candidate captured 60 percent of the pop-
ular vote, for example, the candidate would earn 60
percent of the state’s electoral vote.
This plan  too would  cure  the winner-take-all
problem. Moreover, it would remove the possibility

of electors  voting  for  someone  that  they  are  not
pledged  to  support. Critics  of the  plan  point  out
that  it could possibly enlarge  the role of third par-
ties  and  complicate  the  election  process. Because
third-par ty  candidates  could  get  at  least  some
share  of the  electoral  vote   in  each   election, they
might  also  be  able  to  force  a  presidential  election
into the House of Representatives.

Popular and Electoral Votes
Popular and Electoral Votes
2004
Electoral Vote

WA

OR

ID

NV

CA

UT

AZ

MT

WY

CO

NM

AK

HI

NH

VT

ME

MA

RI

CT
NJ
DE

MD

ND

SD

NE

MN

WI

IA

KS

OK

TX

MO

AR

LA

MI

IL

IN

OH

KY
TN

NY

PA

WV VA
NC
SC

MS AL

GA

FL

Bush
286
53.2%

Bush
59,729,952
51%

* Preliminary figures as of November 9, 2004
Source: The Washington Post Company, November 9, 2004.

Republican
(Bush)

Democrat
(Kerry)

WA

OR

ID

NV

CA

UT

AZ

MT

WY

CO

NM

AK

HI

* May not total 100% due to rounding
Source: Federal Election Commission.

2000

ND

SD

NE

MN

WI

IA

KS

OK

TX

MO

AR

LA

NH

ME

VT

MA

RI

CT
NJ
DE
MD

MI

IL

IN

OH

KY
TN

NY

PA

WV VA
NC
SC

MS AL

GA

FL

Bush
271
50.5%

Bush
50,456,002
47.9%

Republican
(Bush)

Democrat
(Gore)

Green Party
(Nader)

Popular Vote*

Other
1,085,228
1%

Electoral Vote

Popular Vote*

Kerry
251
46.7%

Kerry
56,249,551
48%

Gore
266
49.5%

Gore
50,999,897
48.4%

Nader
2,882,955
2.7%

Critical Thinking
                            After losing the popular vote in 2000, President George W. Bush won both the 
electoral vote and the popular vote in 2004. Which states that backed the Democratic candidate 
in 2000 voted Republican in 2004?

CHAPTER 8: THE PRESIDENCY 225

220-227 CH08S2-860053  12/1/04  6:51 PM  Page 226

Direct  Popular  Election Another
plan is to do away with the Electoral Col-
lege entirely. Instead, the people would di-
rectly  elect  the  president  and  v ice
president. While this alternative may seem
obv ious, some  have  criticized  it  on  the
grounds  that  it would  greatly  change  the
structure  of the  federal  system. It would
undermine  federalism  because  the  states
would  lose  their  role  in  the  choice  of a
president. It would also mean  that candi-
dates would  concentrate  their  efforts  in
densely populated areas. Large cities such
as New York  and  Los Angeles  could  con-
trol the outcome of an election.

By  custom, an  inaugural  ceremony  is
held  outside  the Capitol  in Washington,
D.C., weather permitting. The new presi-
dent  rides  w ith  the  outgoing  president
from  the White House  to  the Capitol  for
the  inauguration  ceremonies. With  the
outgoing president, family members, gov-
ernment officials, and citizens looking on,
the  chief justice  administers  the  oath  of
office. The new president then gives an In-
augural Address.
Several presidents have made notable
inaugural speeches that have become part
of the nation’s heritage. Abraham Lincoln
spoke  about  healing  and  protecting  a  di-
vided nation in 1865. At his inauguration
in  the  depths  of the  Great  Depression,
Franklin D. Roosevelt  lifted  the  spirits  of
his fellow Americans with the words, “The
only thing we have to fear is fear itself.” In
1961 John F. Kennedy called on all Amer-
icans  to “ask  not what  your  country  can
do for you—ask what you can do for your
country.”
Members of Congress, foreign diplomats, and
thousands of citizens attend the inaugural ceremo-
ny. Millions watch on  television. After  the  speech,
a  parade  goes  from  the  Capitol  to  the  White
House. That  evening  official  parties  celebrate  the
inauguration  to  thank  people who  supported  the
president’s election campaign.

Souvenir from 
John F. Kennedy’s 
inauguration

The Inauguration
The new president, called the pres-
ident-elect  until  the  inauguration,
takes  office  at  noon  on  January  20  in  the
year  follow ing  the  presidential  election.
The Constitution  requires  the  president
to take this simple oath:
“ I do solemnly swear (or affirm), that I will
faithfully execute the office of President of
the United States, and will, to the best of
my ability, preserve, protect, and defend
the Constitution of the United States. ”
—Article II, Section 8
S e c t i o n   2   A s s e s s m e n t
S e c t i o n   2   A s s e s s m e n t

Inauguration

Checking for Understanding
1. Main Idea Using a 
graphic organizer such 
as the one to the right, 
describe the ceremonial 
events that usually 
occur when a new 
president takes office.
2. Define elector, electoral vote.
3. Identify Electoral College, Twelfth Amendment.
4. Why do presidential candidates spend more time
in states with large populations?
5. What does the phrase “winner take all” mean in
presidential elections?

226 CHAPTER 8: THE PRESIDENCY

Critical Thinking
6. Determining Relevance In judging the Electoral
College, how important is it to know that on 
several occasions an elector broke with custom
and voted independently?

Constitutional Interpretations Imagine 
that you are a member of an interest 
group. Choose a position for your group: 
keep the Electoral College, or abolish it. 
Then write a persuasive speech explaining
your position.

220-227 CH08S2-860053  12/1/04  6:51 PM  Page 227

toto

SHOULD THE ELECTORAL
COLLEGE BE REPLACED?

Some Americans think the Electoral College is outdated and ineffective. They want to
abolish it and replace it with a system that lets people vote directly for a president. Those
who favor the electoral system think it helps to unify the nation, as its creators intended.

WINNER TAKE ALL
The most common argument
against the Electoral College system
is that a candidate can win without
receiving a majority of the popular
vote as George W. Bush did in the
2000 election. Another argument
is that a candidate can win a ma-
jority of the popular vote and more
electoral votes than any other candi-
date, but still lose. This can happen if a
candidate does not receive a majority of
electoral votes, and the House of Representa-
tives is called to decide on a winner. 
A candidate can also win a large percentage of
popular votes in a state, but have no electoral votes
to show for it. This is especially true for third-party
candidates.  
Critics say that the Electoral College system robs
voters of their power, because candidates often ig-
nore smaller states with fewer electoral votes.

GUARDING AGAINST TYRANNY
Supporters of the Electoral 
College say most people do not
understand the merits of the 
system. James Madison, one of
the original creators, believed
that if a majority vote was used,
the rights of minorities could 
be compromised. He wanted to
guard against "the superior force
of an . . . overbearing majority." 
Under the Electoral College sys-
tem, a candidate cannot win without win-
ning in a large number of states. Supporters
consider this an advantage because candidates
must reach a broad range of people with varying
viewpoints to win the vote. Those who focus on 
narrow segments of the population are less likely to
be elected. Supporters also contend that each voter
has more clout in an election that involves 51 sepa-
rate elections than in one large national election.

Debating the Issue
Debating the Issue

SHOULD DIRECT ELECTIONS REPLACE THE ELECTORAL COLLEGE SYSTEM?
Assume that you are a citizen testifying 
✔ How would presidential campaigns be affected
before a congressional committee weighing the 
by direct elections?
advantages and disadvantages of the Electoral 
College system.

KEY ISSUES
✔ What was the original purpose of the Electoral
College? Does it serve that purpose effectively?
✔ What are the advantages and disadvantages of
having a direct election?

Debate Divide the class into two groups—one that
supports the system and one that does not. Allow
time for each group to prepare and present their 
arguments to the class.

Vote Make your decision. Then have the class vote
for or against replacing the Electoral College system.

CHAPTER 8: THE PRESIDENCY 227

228-233 CH08S3-860053  12/1/04  7:23 PM  Page 228

S e c t i o n   3
S e c t i o n   3
The Cabinet
Soon  after  President Washington’s  election,
Reader’s Guide
Congress  created  a Department  of State, a
Department  of War, a Department  of the
Treasury, and the Attorney General’s office.
The  president met  regularly with  his  department
heads  and  sought  their  advice  on  policy matters.
The  newspapers  of the  time  called  this  group
Washington’s cabinet, the general  term  for  the ad-
visers around any head of state. The name stuck.
One  of the  first  responsibilities  of a  president
is  to  organize  and  staff the  executive  branch  of
government. In  fact, the  president-elect  often  has
selected most of his nominees for cabinet appoint-
ments before taking the oath of office.
Today  the  president  appoints  the  secretaries
that  head  the  15  major  executive  depar tments.
Each  appointee must  be  approved  by  the  Senate.
The  15  secretaries, the  vice president, and  several
other  top  officials make  up  the  cabinet. Cabinet
secretaries  are more  than  advisers; they  are  also
administrators of large bureaucracies.

Key Terms
cabinet, leak
Find Out
■ What  role does politics play  in  the appointment
of cabinet secretaries? 
■ How have  factors  that  limit  the  role of  the cabi-
net as an advisory body affected  the  relation-
ship between cabinet officers and  the presi-
dents  they serve? 
Understanding Concepts
Political Processes Why are cabinet secretaries
who administer large executive departments often
not insiders at the White House?

Je f ferson  Res igns
N EW YORK C ITY ,  D ECEMBER 3 1 ,   1 7 9 3
T h e   b i t t e r  
t h a t  
f e u d  
h a s   p l a g u e d   P r e s i d e n t
G e o r g e   Wa s h i n g t o n’s   c a b i -
n e t   e n d e d   to d ay, a s   T h om a s
s t e p p e d   d ow n  
J e f f e r s o n  
a s   s e c r e t a r y   o f s t a t e . T h e  
a c t i o n   f o l l ow e d   m o n t h s   o f
t e n s i o n   b e t w e e n   J e f f e r s o n
a n d   S e c r e t a r y   o f t h e   Tr e a -
s u r y   A l e x a n d e r   H am i l t o n .
T h om a s   J e f f e r s o n
T h e   c o n t e s t   f o r   i n f l u e n c e
w i t h   t h e   p r e s i d e n t   w a s   s e t -
t l e d   d u r i n g   t h e   r e c e n t   c r i s i s   w i t h   F r a n c e , w h e n
Wa s h i n g to n   r e l i e d  o n  Ham i l to n   i n s t e a d  o f h i s   s e c r e -
t a r y  o f s t a t e . Je f f e r s on  r e c en t l y  s a i d  o f h i s  r iv a l , “ I  w i l l
n o t   s u f f e r   my   r e t i r em en t   to   b e   c l o u d e d   by   t h e   s l an -
d e r s   o f a   m a n   w h o s e   h i s t o r y, f rom   t h e   m om e n t   a t
w h i ch   h i s to r y   c a n   s to o p   to   n o t i c e   h im , i s   a   t i s s u e   o f
m a ch i n a t i o n s   a g a i n s t   t h e   l i b e r t y   o f t h e   co u n t r y.”

228 CHAPTER 8: THE PRESIDENCY

The Selection of the Cabinet
In selecting their department heads, pres-
idents must  balance  a  great many  politi-
cal, social, and  management  considerations.
Secretaries  should  have  some  credible  expertise
in  the  policy  areas  their  departments will man-
age. Appointees must be acceptable to all groups
with  political  power. They  should  provide  geo-
graphic balance as well as racial and gender rep-
resentation. Patronage and party loyalty also are
usually important.
Major Factors in Making Appointments
The  selection of a president’s  cabinet  is  largely
a political process. One consideration is that an
appointee have  a background  that  is  compati-
ble with  the  department  he  or  she will  head.
This  qualification  also  can  bring  some  geo-
graphic balance to the cabinet. The secretary of
the interior, for example, typically is someone

228-233 CH08S3-860053  12/1/04  7:23 PM  Page 229

from  a western  state who  has  experience  in  land
policy  and  conservation  issues. The  secretary  of
housing and urban development (HUD) generally
has  a  big  city  background. The  secretary  of agri-
culture usually is from a farm state.
Equally  important  is  the  president’s  need  to
satisfy powerful interest groups that have a stake in
a  depar tment’s  policies. The  secretary  of labor,
therefore, generally must be someone acceptable to
labor  unions. The  secretary  of commerce  is  ex-
pected  to  have  a  good  reputation  w ith  business
and industry. The secretary of the treasury is often
a banker or someone with close ties to the financial
community.
In  addition, it  is  impor tant  that  appointees
have  high-level  administrative  skills  and  experi-
ence. Cabinet officers are responsible for huge de-
partments  that  employ  thousands  of people  and
spend  billions  of dollars  each  year. If inefficiency
or scandal should result, blame will fall on the sec-
retary—and on the president.
As women  and minority  groups  have  gained
political  power, presidents  have  considered  the
race, gender, and ethnic background of candidates
when making their appointments. In 1966 Lyndon
Johnson named the first African American depart-
ment  secretary, Rober t  Weaver, to  lead  HUD.
Franklin D. Roosevelt  appointed  the  first woman

to the cabinet, Secretary of Labor Frances Perkins,
in 1933. Women in the cabinet remained rare until
1975, when  President  Ford  appointed Carla Hills
as  HUD  secretary. Since  then, every  president’s
cabinet  has  included women  and African Ameri-
cans. President  Reagan  named  the  first Hispanic,
Lauro  F. Cavazos, as  secretary  of education, in
1988. President  Clinton  used  cabinet  appoint-
ments as an opportunity to recruit women and mi-
norities  to  top  government  posts. The  Clinton
cabinet  became  the most  gender  and  racially  bal-
anced team in history.
Even  after  people who  satisfy  all  the  require-
ments are selected, obstacles still exist. It is not al-
ways  easy  to  convince  them  to  take  the  positions.
Faced with giving up a secure career for a possible
short-term  appointment, many  qualified  candi-
dates find the pay, the work, or life in Washington
politics to be unattractive. Almost all modern pres-
idents have been turned down by some of the peo-
ple they have invited to join their cabinets.
Background  of  Cabinet  Members What
kind  of person  does  accept  appointment  to  the
cabinet, and why? Almost without exception, cabi-
net members are college graduates. Many have ad-
vanced  degrees. Most  are  leaders  in  the  fields  of
business, industry, law, science, and education.

Clinton’s Chief Diplomat

Interest Groups
Madeleine Albright, the
first female secretary 
of state, shakes hands
with Japanese foreign
minister Yukihiko Ikeda.
Albright is a Washington
academic who fled Com-
munist Czechoslovakia 
as a child. What groups
of citizens might have
felt pride in Albright’s
appointment?

CHAPTER 8: THE PRESIDENCY 229

228-233 CH08S3-860053  12/1/04  7:23 PM  Page 230

Cabinet secretaries earn $161,200 per year, and
many  cabinet members  assume  government  jobs
even  though  they  know  that  they  could  have
earned more  than  tw ice  that  amount  in  private
employment. Some  take  their  posts  out  of a  deep
sense of public  service. Typically  they move  easily
in  and  out  of government  posts  from  their  posi-
tions  in  private  industry  or  the  legal, financial, or
educational world.
Nominations and Confirmation The selec-
tion  process  for  a  new  president’s  cabinet  begins
long before Inauguration Day. The president-elect
draws up a  list of candidates after consulting with
campaign advisers, congressional leaders, and rep-
resentatives  of interest  groups. Key  campaign
staffers meet with  potential  candidates  to  discuss
the issues facing the department they may be asked
to head. Before making final decisions, members of
the president-elect’s team may leak, or deliberate-
ly  disclose, some  candidates’ names  to  the  news
media. They  do  this  to  test  the  reaction  of Con-
gress, interest groups, and the public.
The  Senate  holds  confirmation  hearings  on
the  president’s  nominees  for  cabinet  posts. The
nominee  to head each department appears before
the  Senate  committee  that  oversees  the  depar t-
ment  to  answer  questions  about  his  or  her  back-
ground and views.

The cabinet is viewed as part of the president’s
official  family. The  Senate, therefore, usually 
cooperates  in  the  appointment  process, and most 
confirmation  hearings  are  routine. Of more  than
500 cabinet appointments since the time of George
Washington, the Senate has rejected only a handful.
Appointments  are  not  automatic, however.
President Clinton  had  been  in  office  less  than  a
month  when  his  nominee  for  attorney  general,
Zoë  Baird, had  to  bow  out  of the  confirmation
process. In the midst of Senate hearings, a newspa-
per  repor ted  that  Baird  earlier  had  hired  illegal
aliens for household work. A groundswell of pub-
lic opinion derailed the nomination.

The Role of the Cabinet
As  indiv iduals, cabinet  members  are  re-
sponsible  for  the  executive  depar tments
they  head. As  a  group, the  cabinet  is  intended  to
serve  as  an  adv isory  body  to  the  president. For
many reasons, however, most presidents have been
reluctant to give the cabinet a major advisory role.
The  cabinet meets when  the  president  calls  it
together. Meetings may be once a week but usually
are much less frequent, depending on how a presi-
dent  uses  the  cabinet. Meetings  take  place  in  the
cabinet  room of the White House  and  are usually
closed to the public and the press.

The First Cabinet

Advising the President
Seated next to President
Washington are the mem-
bers of the first cabinet—
Henry Knox, Alexander
Hamilton, Thomas 
Jefferson, and Edmund
Randolph. Analyze the
role of the cabinet. How
has its role and size
changed since 
Washington’s first 
administration?

230 CHAPTER 8: THE PRESIDENCY

228-233 CH08S3-860053  12/1/04  7:23 PM  Page 231

Cabinet Members at Work

Influencing Policy
Secretary of State
Colin Powell (left),
Secretary of Defense
Donald Rumsfeld,
and Secretary of
Commerce Donald
Evans (right) listen as
President George W.
Bush discusses the 
federal budget during
a cabinet meeting.
Should presidents be
obligated to make
greater use of their
cabinets? Why or
why not?

The Cabinet  in History From the beginning,
the cabinet’s role in decision making has depended
on how each president wanted to define it. Stronger
presidents, such  as  Jackson, Lincoln, Wilson, and
Franklin Roosevelt, have paid the cabinet  less atten-
tion. Andrew Jackson depended on a small group of
friends  instead of his  cabinet  for advice. Since  they
often met in the White House kitchen, they became
known  as  the “kitchen  cabinet.” During  the Great
Depression, Roosevelt  relied more  on  a  group  of
university professors called the “brain trust” and his
wife Eleanor than on his cabinet.
Some members  of Lincoln’s  cabinet  thought
he was weak and  that  they would run  the govern-
ment. They  soon  learned  otherwise. Secretary  of
State William  Seward  acknowledged, “The  Presi-
dent is the best of us. There is only one vote in the
Cabinet, and  it  belongs  to  him.” Lincoln’s  treat-
ment of his cabinet illustrates the role it has played
through much of American history. Before issuing
the Emancipation Proclamation, he called his cab-
inet  together  to  inform  them  of his  intention  to
end slavery. He told them:
“ I have gathered you together to hear what
I have written down. I do not wish your
advice about the main matter. That I have
determined for myself. ”—Abraham Lincoln, 1862

The  Modern  Cabinet Several  recent  presi-
dents  have  attempted  to  increase  the  role  of the
cabinet  in  decision making. In  the  end, however,
most  have  given  up  and  turned  elsewhere  for  ad-
v ice. After  President  Kennedy  was  assassinated,
Lyndon Johnson was anxious to get along with his
predecessor’s cabinet. He felt he needed them for a
smooth  transition  of power  and wanted  them  to
brief him  on what was  going  on  in  their  depart-
ments. Soon Johnson, too, was calling on the cabi-
net  less and  less. When a meeting occurred, it was
generally to give department heads what one pres-
idential  assistant  called  their “marching  orders.”
Johnson’s  cabinet  fared  better  than  Richard
Nixon’s, however. Some  of Nixon’s  cabinet mem-
bers did not see him for months at a time.
At  the  start  of his  presidency, Ronald  Reagan
also pledged to make greater use of the cabinet. He
stated  that  his  depar tment  heads  would  be  his
“inner circle of advisers.” In an attempt to improve
its  usefulness, Reagan  div ided  his  cabinet  into
smaller  groups. Each  group was  responsible  for  a
broad policy area such as natural resources or food
and agriculture. After only a year in office, howev-
er, Reagan  began  to  rely  mainly  on  his  White
House aides for advice. Presidents Bush and Clin-
ton  used  their  cabinets  as  sounding  boards  for
their  ideas rather than as the advisory body Presi-
dent Washington envisioned.

CHAPTER 8: THE PRESIDENCY 231

228-233 CH08S3-860053  12/1/04  7:24 PM  Page 232

The Influence of Cabinet Members Some
cabinet members who work closely with the presi-
dent  w ield  influence  because  they  head  depar t-
ments that are concerned with national issues. The
secretaries of state, defense, treasury, and the attor-
ney  general  fill  this  role  in most  administrations.
These officials are sometimes called an “inner cab-
inet.” Other  secretaries  who  head  depar tments
that  represent  narrower  interests  such  as  agricul-
ture or veterans’ affairs are less influential and have
less direct access to the president.

Factors Limiting 
the Cabinet’s Role
Several  factors  limit  the  president’s  use  of
the  cabinet  for  advice  in making  key  deci-
sions or  for help  in running  the executive branch.
Understanding  these  factors  helps  to  explain why
presidents  have  come  to  rely  on  assistants  in  the
Executive Office of the President, a presidential ad-
visory agency established by Congress.
Conflicting  Loyalties No  president  com-
mands  the  complete  loyalty  of cabinet members.
Even though the president appoints them, cabinet
officials  have  three  other  constituencies  that  re-
quire  loyalty: career  officials  in  their  own  depart-
ment, members  of Congress, and  special-interest
groups. Each  of these  groups  has  its  own  stake  in

the  depar tment’s  programs. Each may  push  the
secretary in directions that are not always in accord
with the president’s plans and policies.
Disagreements  among  secretaries may  result
from  loyalty  to  their department’s programs or  to
its  constituent  groups. In  addition, competition
among  secretaries  for  control  of a  program may
cause  conflict  in  the  cabinet. President  Reagan’s
secretary of state, George Schulz, and Secretary of
Defense Caspar Weinberger  battled  to  influence
the  president  on  arms  control  and  foreign  policy
for almost  two years before Weinberger  finally  re-
signed in 1987.
Secrecy  and  Trust A  second  factor  that  re-
duces the usefulness of the cabinet is the difficulty
of maintaining secrecy when 15 cabinet secretaries
are  involved  in  a  discussion  of sensitive  topics.
Presidents  sometimes have discovered  cabinet de-
bates reported in the press.
Presidents, like  anyone  else, would  prefer  to
discuss  tough  problems  w ith  people  they  know
and  trust. Yet, because  of all  the  factors  that must
be  considered when  choosing  department  heads,
presidents  generally  appoint  relative  strangers  to
their  cabinets. President  Kennedy, for  example,
had  never met  his  secretary  of defense  and  secre-
tary of the treasury before he appointed them. For
these  reasons  presidents  have  increasingly  turned
to the Executive Office of the President and to their
own personal White House staffs for help.

Pres.

Checking for Understanding
1. Main Idea Using a graphic 
organizer like the one to the 
right, show which cabinet 
members often form an “inner 
circle” closer to the president 
and which have less direct contact.
2. Define cabinet, leak.
3. Identify Robert Weaver, Frances Perkins.
4. What five factors do presidents consider when
choosing cabinet officers?
5. Explain how the decline of the cabinet as an ad-
visory body to the president weakens the system
of checks and balances.

S e c t i o n   3   A s s e s s m e n t
S e c t i o n   3   A s s e s s m e n t
S e c t i o n   3   R e v i e w
S e c t i o n   3   R e v i e w
Critical Thinking
6. Identifying Alternatives What could a president
do when choosing cabinet members to increase
their value as advisers?

Political Processes Search library resources
for information about the major responsibilities
of one of the 15 executive departments. Then
prepare a list of interview questions that you
think would help to determine the competence
of a potential secretary of the executive de-
partment you chose. 

232 CHAPTER 8: THE PRESIDENCY

228-233 CH08S3-860053  12/1/04  7:24 PM  Page 233

Interpreting an Election Map
Election maps show various kinds of infor-
Electoral Votes, 1960 Election
mation about an election. For example,
an election map might show the results of
a presidential election by  identifying the states
that voted for each candidate. Another map
might show the outcome of a congressional 
election, district by district.

WA

WV

IL

IN

WY

ND

SD

NE

PA

VA

NH

VT

MN

IA

MO

UT

CO

WI

MI

NV

CA

OR

ID

MT

NY

KS

ME

MA
RI
CT

NJ

DE
MD

Learning the Skill

To read an election map, follow these steps:
• Examine the map title or caption to deter-
mine what election information is being
shown.
• Examine the map key to determine how in-
formation is presented.
• Based on this information, decide what
kinds of questions the map is intended to
answer.
The map below answers some questions
about the election of 1948, but not others. It 
does not, for example, provide the results of the
popular vote or the results of the final vote in 
the Electoral College.
Electoral Votes, 1948 Election

WA

OR

ID

NV

UT

CA

MT

WY

CO

ND

SD

NE

MN

IA

WI

MI

OH

IL

IN

KS

MO

KY

TN

NY

PA

WV VA
NC
SC

NH

ME

VT

MA
RI
CT
NJ
DE
MD

AZ

NM

OK

TX

AR

LA

MS AL GA

FL

Republican

Democrat

States’ Rights Democrat

OH

KY
TN

AZ

NM

OK

AR

MS

AL GA

TX

LA

AK

HI

NC
SC

FL

Republican

Democrat

Independent

Practicing the Skill

Evaluate the map above and answer the ques-
tions that follow.
1. What does the color red indicate on this map?
2. What does the color blue indicate?
3. How many states voted Republican?
4. Which states split their electoral votes?
5. Compare the two maps. Which states that
voted Republican in 1948 voted Democratic 
in 1960?

Application Activity
Application Activity
In an almanac, newspaper, or other ref-
erence work, find the results of a recent city,
state, or national election. Draw an election
Application Activity
Application Activity
map to present those results. Include a key
on your map.

The Glencoe Skillbuilder
Interactive Workbook, Level 2
provides  instruction and practice
in key social studies skills.

233

234-243 CH08S4-860053  12/1/04  7:14 PM  Page 234

S e c t i o n   4
S e c t i o n   4
The Executive Of fice
Not all staff advisers are as high-profile as
Reader’s Guide
President  Reagan’s  National  Security
Council members were in 1987. The Ex-
ecutive Office of the President  (EOP)
consists of individuals and agencies that directly as-
sist  the  president. Modern  presidents  rely  on  the
EOP to provide specialized advice and information
needed for decision making. They also use it to help
them implement presidential decisions and to gain
more control over the executive branch.

Key Terms
central clearance, national security adviser, 
press secretary
Find Out
■ What historic changes have made  the
Executive Office of  the President necessary?
■ In what ways are  the members of  the White
House Office similar  to and different  from  the
president’s cabinet?
Understanding Concepts
Political Processes Who are among the presi-
dent’s closest advisers on administration policy?

Executive Office Agencies 
Created  by  President  Franklin D. Roosevelt
in 1939, the Executive Office of the President
has  grown  to  serve  the  needs  of each  administra-
tion. When Roosevelt  took  office  in  1933  during
the Great Depression, he  immediately  proposed  a
vast number of federal programs  to deal with  the
country’s serious economic problems. As Congress
passed one special program after another, the size
of the national government began to grow rapidly.
By  the  mid-1930s, Roosevelt  and  his  few
White House assistants felt overwhelmed because
they  could  not  coordinate  all  the  new  programs
and  gather  all  the  information  the  president
needed. Consequently, in  1936  Roosevelt  ap-
pointed the President’s Committee on Adminis-
trative Management to study the problem. In its
report the Committee recommended that a per-
sonal  staff be “installed  in  the White House  it-
self, directly  accessible  to  the  president.” This
staff was to assist the president in:
“Obtaining quickly and without delay all
pertinent information . . . so as to guide
him in making responsible decisions, and
then when decisions have been made, to
assist him in seeing to it that every admin-
istrative department and agency affected is
promptly informed. ”
—The President’s Committee on 
Administrative Management, 1937

Bush  Gran ts  Pardons
WASH INGTON ,  D .C . ,  D ECEMBER 2 4 ,   1 9 9 2
P r e s i d en t   G e o r g e   H .W.
Bu s h   to d ay   p a rd on e d
Wh i te  House  a ides  o f former
pres iden t   Rona ld   Reagan   for
t h e
in  
invo lvem en t  
t h e i r  
T h e  
a f f a i r.
I r a n - c o n t r a  
l e g a l
p a r d o n s   c l o s e d   t h e  
t roub l e s  o f tho s e  invo lved  in
th e   s c and a l , wh i ch   b ro ke   in
1 9 8 6 . Two   Re a g a n   n a t i o n a l
P r o t e s t i n g   U . S .  
s e c u r i t y   a d v i s e r s   a n d   Na -
i n t e r v e n t i o n   i n  
t ion a l   S e cu r i t y  Coun c i l   s t a f f
C e n t r a l   Am e r i c a
s e c r e t
w e r e   c o nv i c t e d   o f
w e apon s  s a l e s  to  I r an  and  i l -
l e g a l   a i d   to   t h e   N i c a r a g u a n   “co n t r a” r e b e l s . In   1 9 8 7
Re a g an   a ccep ted   a   repo r t   th a t  b l am ed   th e   s c and a l  on
h i s  “ h and s -o f f ” a t t i tud e   tow a rd   h i s   adv i s e r s . He   a l so
a ccep ted   re spon s ib i l i t y   fo r   th e   a c t ion s   o f h i s   s t a f f .

234 CHAPTER 8: THE PRESIDENCY

234-243 CH08S4-860053  12/1/04  7:14 PM  Page 235

In  response Congress  passed  the  Reorganiza-
tion Act  of 1939  that  created  the  Executive Office
of the  President. At  the  same  time, President
Franklin Roosevelt moved the Bureau of the Bud-
get out of the Treasury Department  into  the EOP,
where  it would  be more  responsive  to  his wishes
and he could be more aware of its activities. As an-
other  par t  of the  EOP, he  established  the White

House  Office, which  he  intended  to   be  a  small
group of advisers working directly with  the presi-
dent on day-to-day matters.
Organization  and  Growth Today  the  EOP
consists  of the White  House  Office  and  several 
specialized  agencies  that  all  report  directly  to  the
president. Agency staffs include attorneys, scientists,

Executive Employees from Roosevelt through Bush
Executive Employees from Roosevelt through Bush

s
e
e
y
o
l
p
m
E
 
f
o
 
r
e
b
m
u
N

6,000

5,000

4,000

3,000

2,000

1,000

0

Roosevelt  
(1933–1945)

Truman
(1945–1953)

Kennedy  
(1961–1963)

Nixon  
(1969–1974)

Carter
(1977–1981)

G.H.W. Bush
(1989–1993)

G.W. Bush  
(2001–       )

Eisenhower 
(1953–1961)

Johnson
(1963–1969)
President

Ford  
(1974–1977)

Reagan  
(1981–1989)

Clinton  
(1993–2001)

Selected Offices Within the EOP, 2004*

Office of Management and Budget

Council on Enviromental Quality

Council of Economic Advisers

National Security Council

USA Freedom Corps

Office of Administration

Office of National Drug Control Policy

Office of Science and Technology Policy

National Economic Council

President’s Foreign Intelligence Advisory Board

Office of the United States Trade Representative

Domestic Policy Council

* The offices in the EOP are constantly changing; they are not a fixed or mandated group.

Source: Office of Management and Budget, 2001; www.whitehouse.gov.

Critical Thinking
 
 
    The number of executive office employees reached its peak in the early 
1970s. Why do you think this number dropped after 1974?

CHAPTER 8: THE PRESIDENCY 235

234-243 CH08S4-860053  12/1/04  7:15 PM  Page 236

social scientists, and other highly technical or pro-
fessional  personnel. The  EOP  currently  has more
than  1,500  full-time  employees, many  of whom
work in the west wing of the White House.
The Executive Office of the President has grown
rapidly for three reasons. First, every president has
reorganized  it, adding new  agencies  or  expanding
existing  ones  in  response  to  the  problems  of the
day. For example, after an American-sponsored in-
vasion  of Cuba  failed  in  1961, President Kennedy
enlarged the National Security Council staff.
Second, because some problems facing the na-
tion’s industrial society are so complex, presidents
have wanted experts available to advise them about
issues  related  to  those  problems. The Council  of
Economic Advisers was created for this reason.
Third, many of today’s huge federal programs
require several executive departments and agencies
to  work  together. EOP  staff members  have 
been  added  to  help  coordinate  these  efforts. For

Preparing the National Budget

Budget Priorities Under OMB director Franklin
Raines, the 1998 budget ran a surplus. Prior to this,
the last balanced budget was in 1969. How does
the federal budget reflect the administration’s
priorities?

236 CHAPTER 8: THE PRESIDENCY

example, President  Reagan  created  the Office  of
National Drug  Control  Policy  in  1988. This  de-
partment  coordinated  the  activities  of more  than
50 federal agencies involved in the war on drugs.
Three  of the  oldest  agencies  in  the  EOP  have
played  the  greatest  role  in  presidential  decision
making. They  are  the Office  of Management  and
Budget, the  National  Security  Council, and  the
Council of Economic Advisers.
The  Office  of  Management  and  Budget
Before 1970  the Office of Management and Bud-
get (OMB) was called the Bureau of the Budget. It
is the largest agency in the EOP. Its director, usual-
ly a trusted supporter of the president, has become
as  important  as  the  cabinet  secretaries. The OMB
prepares  the  national  budget  that  the  president
proposes to Congress each year.
Budgets reflect priorities. Because the nation’s
budget is not unlimited, the president must decide
what  spending  is  important  and what  is  not. The
OMB’s budget indicates what programs the feder-
al  government will  pay  for  and  how much  it will
spend on them. Thus, the budget is a key way for a
president  to  influence  the  government’s  direction
and  policies. In  1980  Ronald  Reagan  campaigned
on a pledge to reduce the federal government’s role
in society and trim federal spending. Immediately
after  taking  office, Reagan  ordered David  Stock-
man, his budget director, to prepare detailed plans
to  cut  billions  of dollars  from  government  pro-
grams. Since  the Reagan  administration, the bud-
get  director  has  taken  an  active  role  in  shaping
national policy.
Each  year  all  executive  agencies  submit  their
budgets to the OMB for review before they go into
the president’s budget. OMB officials then recom-
mend to the president where to make cuts in each
agency budget. To  challenge  an OMB  recommen-
dation, an agency director must appeal directly  to
the  president  or  a  top  adviser. This  system  gives
OMB real and continuing influence over executive
agencies.
The OMB also reviews all legislative proposals
executive  agencies  prepare. This  rev iew  is  called
central clearance. If, for example, the Department
of Agriculture drafts a bill on farm price supports,
OMB officials will review  the bill before  it goes  to
Congress. They make sure it agrees with the presi-
dent’s policy objectives.

234-243 CH08S4-860053  12/1/04  7:15 PM  Page 237

The  National  Security  Council Congress
created  the National  Security Council  (NSC) in
1947  to  advise  the  president  and  help  coordinate
American military  and  foreign  policy. Headed  by
the  president, the  council  also  includes  the  v ice
president, secretary  of state, and  secretary  of de-
fense. The  president may  ask  other  advisers, such
as  the CIA  director  or  the  chairman  of the  Joint
Chiefs of Staff, to participate in NSC meetings.
A special assistant for national security affairs,
commonly  called  the  national  security  adv iser,
directs  the  NSC  staff. Perhaps  more  than  most
other advisory groups, the importance of the NSC
has  varied with  the  president’s  use  of it. Truman
did  little with  the NSC. Eisenhower held  frequent
NSC meetings, but he relied more on the advice of
his  secretary  of state, John  Foster Dulles. Under
Kennedy  the NSC  assumed more  importance  in
presidential decision making.
During President Nixon’s first term from 1969
to 1973, National Security Adviser Henry Kissinger
had a great deal of authority. Working closely with
Nixon, Kissinger developed the NSC into a kind of
alternate State Department in the White House. In
1973 he negotiated the end of the Vietnam War. He
also negotiated the opening of diplomatic relations
w ith  China  and  coordinated  arms-control  talks
with the Soviet Union.
President Carter  experienced  similar  overlap
in the activities of his national security adviser and
his  secretary  of state. The  governments  of other
nations complained about the confusion this situ-
ation  created  and  asked whether  the NSC  or  the
State Department  spoke  for  the United  States  in
foreign-policy matters.
The National Homeland Security Council
In October 2001, after terrorists attacked the Penta-
gon and  the World Trade Center, President George
W. Bush  created  the Office  of Homeland  Security
and  the  Homeland  Security  Council  within  the
Executive Office of the President. In November 2002,
the Homeland Security Act created the Department
of Homeland  Security. This  new  cabinet  depart-
ment  coordinates  all  federal  agencies working  to
counter terrorism in the United States. It is also re-
sponsible for developing a national strategy to pro-
tect the United States from future terrorist attacks.
The National Homeland  Security Council  re-
mained within the EOP. It advises the president on

The National Security Adviser

Checks and Balances Henry Kissinger
(right), Nixon’s most influential foreign policy
adviser, won the 1973 Nobel Peace Prize with
Le Duc Tho, the North Vietnamese negotiator,
for negotiating a cease-fire in the Vietnam War.
Fighting went on, though, until 1975. What
diplomatic milestones did Kissinger achieve
when he was head of NSC?

homeland  security  issues and  is headed by  the  sec-
retary of Homeland Security. The attorney general,
the directors  of the  FBI, CIA, and  Federal Emer-
gency Management Agency (FEMA), and the secre-
taries  of Defense, Treasury, Transportation, and
Health and Human Services all serve on the Council.
The  Council’s  first  major  task  arose  shor tly
after  September  11, when  letters  containing  an-
thrax—a potentially  lethal  type of bacteria—were
sent  to  government  offices  and  the  news media.
Several  people  died  and  some  government  build-
ings  were  temporarily  evacuated. Thousands  of
people  began  taking  antibiotics  as  a  precaution
against the disease.
The Council of Economic Advisers Since
the Great Depression, the  president  has  been  the
nation’s  chief economic planner. Created  in  1946,
the Council of Economic Advisers helps the presi-
dent formulate the nation’s economic policy.

CHAPTER 8: THE PRESIDENCY 237

234-243 CH08S4-860053  12/1/04  7:15 PM  Page 238

Presenting the President’s Views to the World

Press Secretary
President George W.
Bush’s press secre-
tary, Scott McClellan,
answers reporters’
questions. The press
secretary meets 
regularly with the
media to keep the
public informed of the
president’s views and
decisions. What
other officers are
top assistants to a
president?

The  Council  assesses  the  nation’s  economic
health, predicts  future  economic  conditions, and
aids  other  executive  agencies  involved w ith  eco-
nomic planning. It also proposes solutions to spe-
cific  problems,
such  as  unemployment  or
inflation. It  has  access  to  information  any  federal
agency  gathers  hav ing  to  do  w ith  the American
economy. The Council also helps prepare an annu-
al report that is included in the Economic Report of
the President and transmitted to Congress.
Other  EOP  Agencies The number and size of
EOP  agencies  varies  according  to  the  priorities  of
each president. For  example, President  Johnson  set
up an Office of Economic Opportunity  to help  im-
plement his domestic programs. President Nixon,
however, opposed many of Johnson’s  social policies
and eliminated the agency.
The Domestic Policy Council helps the president
plan and  carry out  long-range policies  in domestic
areas such as farming and energy. The National Eco-
nomic Council helps carry out long-range economic
policy. The Office of Environmental Policy advises
the  president  on  environmental  issues  and  works
closely with  the Environmental Protection Agency
and the departments of Interior, Agriculture, and En-
ergy. The Office of Science and Technology Policy ad-
vises the president on all scientific and technological

238 CHAPTER 8: THE PRESIDENCY

matters  that affect national policies and programs.
The Office of the United States Trade Representative
helps negotiate trade agreements with other nations.

The White House Office
The nation’s first presidents had no person-
al  staff. George  Washington  hired  his
nephew at his own expense to be his personal sec-
retary. When  James Polk was president  from 1845
to 1849, his wife Sarah served as his secretary. Dur-
ing  the  1890s  both  presidents  Cleveland  and
McKinley  personally  answered  the White House
telephone. As  late  as  the  1930s, Herbert Hoover’s
personal staff consisted of a few secretaries, sever-
al administrative assistants, and a cook.
In  its  1937  study  of the  executive  branch, the
President’s Committee  on Administrative Man-
agement concluded:
“ The President needs help. His immediate
staff assistance is entirely inadequate. He
should be given a small number of execu-
tive assistants who would be his direct
aides in dealing with the managerial agen-
cies and administrative departments. ”
—The President’s Committee on 
Administrative Management, 1937

234-243 CH08S4-860053  12/1/04  7:16 PM  Page 239

Organization  and  Growth Unlike  the  selec-
tion  of cabinet members, the  president  appoints
White House  staff without  Senate  confirmation.
Key aides usually are longtime personal supporters
of the president. Many are newcomers to Washing-
ton. They do not usually have large constituencies,
as do some cabinet officers.
The White House Office has become the most
important part of the Executive Office of the Pres-
ident. From about 50 people under Roosevelt, the
White  House  staff grew  to  almost  600  under
Nixon. Clinton’s White House Office  consisted  of
about  380  people, a  small  number  of whom  re-
ported  directly  to  the  president. These  top  assis-
tants became an inner circle around the president.
Chief among  them were  the  president’s  chief of
staff, deputy  chief of staff, White House  counsel,
and press secretary.
Duties  of  the White  House  Staff White
House aides perform whatever duties the president
assigns  them. Because  of the  role  they  perform,
some  aides  become  very  influential. One  former
presidential  adviser  confided  to  an  interviewer, “I
had more power over national affairs in a few years
in the White House than I could if I spent the rest
of my life in the Senate.”
One task of the White House Office is to gath-
er information and provide advice about key issues
facing  the  president. Some  staffers  are  policy  spe-
cialists  in  specific  areas  such  as  foreign  affairs  or
energy  problems. Others  are  political  strategists,
mainly concerned with the political impact of pol-

icy  decisions  the  president  makes. The  White
House  counsel  advises  the  president  on  the  legal
consequences of those decisions.
Top staff members also act as enforcers, trying
to make  sure  the  executive  agencies  and  depart-
ments carry out key directives from the president.
Bill Moyers, press  secretary  to  President  Johnson,
explained, “The job of the White House assistant is
to help  the president  impress his priorities on  the
Administration.”
Other  key White  House  staffers  present  the
president’s views to the outside world. A press staff
headed  by  the  press  secretary  handles  the  presi-
dent’s relations with the White House press corps,
sets  up  press  conferences, and  issues  public  state-
ments  in  the  president’s  name. Other  staff people
work  directly  w ith  members  of Congress. The
chief assistant  for  legislative  affairs, for  example,
advises  the  president  about  possible  reactions  in
Congress  to White House  decisions. These  staff
members also lobby the lawmakers to gain support
for presidential programs.
The executive departments and agencies write
the president thousands of reports and memos. In
addition, a  steady  stream  of people  from  inside
and outside the government want to see the presi-
dent. Key aides decide who and what gets through
to the president.
Recent  presidents  have  given  their  top White
House staff increased authority over actual policy-
making. As  a  result, more  and more  policy  deci-
sions  are  being made  in  the White House  rather
than in federal agencies.

White House
Office

Checking for Understanding
1. Main Idea Use a Venn diagram to show how the
functions of the White 
House Office and the 
cabinet are alike and 
how they are different.
2. Define central clearance, national security 
adviser, press secretary.
3. Identify EOP, OMB, NSC.
4. List three reasons why the EOP has grown.
5. What are the three oldest agencies in the EOP,
and what roles do they play?

both

Cabinet

S e c t i o n   4   A s s e s s m e n t
S e c t i o n   4   A s s e s s m e n t
S e c t i o n   4   R e v i e w
S e c t i o n   4   R e v i e w
Critical Thinking
6. Synthesizing Information How does the influ-
ence of key presidential aides affect the checks
and balances established by the Constitution?

Political Processes Find out who the following
presidential advisers are: chief of staff, deputy
chief of staff, White House counsel, and press
secretary. Research the background of each
adviser and present your findings in a chart.

CHAPTER 8: THE PRESIDENCY 239

240_241_TNHS Notebk U.S.Pres  12/3/04  10:37 AM  Page 240

N O T E B O O K

WASHINGTON
TRADITIONS
“I DO SOLEMNLY SWEAR
(or affirm) that I will
faithfully execute the
Office of President of
the United States, and
will to the best of my
ability, preserve, protect
and defend the Constitution
of the United States.”

Every American president since
GEORGE WASHINGTON has taken this same oath of office.
Presidents also follow these traditions set by Washington: 
• Bowing in greeting (replaced later by Thomas Jefferson with
shaking hands);
• Deciding who will join the cabinet;
• Giving an Inaugural Address and annual State of the Union 
messages, as well as a Farewell Address when leaving office;
• Attending the inauguration of the succeeding president.

A
P
 
P
H
O
T
O
/
D
O
U
G
 
M
I
L
L
S

COMFORTING A NATION
THE AMERICAN PEOPLE TURN TO THE
president for leadership, strength, and
comfort in times of national tragedy. On
September 11, 2001, President George
W. Bush spoke to the nation after one
of the greatest tragedies in American
history. Here is part of his speech: 

“Today, our fellow citizens, our way of
life, our very freedom came under attack
in a series of deliberate and deadly
terrorist acts. The victims were in
airplanes, or in their offices; secretaries,
businessmen and women, military and
federal workers; moms and dads, friends and neighbors. Thousands
of lives were suddenly ended by evil, despicable acts of terror. . . . 

“A great people has been moved to defend a great nation. Terrorist
attacks can shake the foundations of our biggest buildings, but they
cannot touch the foundation of America. These acts shattered steel,
but they cannot dent the steel of American resolve. . . .”

240

M I L E S T O N E S
NAMED, 1901. THE WHITE
HOUSE received its official name
from President Theodore
Roosevelt. The president’s
residence has also been called
the President’s Palace, the
Executive Mansion, and the
President’s House. 

TOSSED, 
April 14, 1910. 
THE FIRST BASEBALL of the
season was thrown out by
President William Taft in
Washington, D.C. Other
presidents have continued this
tradition, including John F.
Kennedy, who wanted to make
a good showing and secretly
practiced his throw on the
White House grounds. 

T
H
E
 
G
R
A
N
G
E
R
 
C
O
L
L
E
C
T
I
O
N

B
E
T
T
M
A
N
N
/
C
O
R
B
I
S

R
O
N
 
S
A
C
H
S
/
C
O
R
B
I
S

WIRED, 2001.  A WHITE HOUSE
WEB SITE with news and
information about the First
Family’s life in their famous
residence was introduced
by George W. Bush’s
administration.
The site even
includes a
video tour
conducted
by the
Bush’s
Scottish
terrier, Barney. 

240_241_TNHS Notebk U.S.Pres  12/1/04  7:29 PM  Page 241

U . S .   P R E S I D E N T S

V E R B A T I M
W H A T   P E O P L E   S A I D
“We have talked long enough in
this country about equal rights.
We have talked 100 years or
more. It is time now to write the
next chapter, and to write it in the
books of law.”
PRESIDENT LYNDON JOHNSON, 
1963, shortly before getting Congress
to pass the Civil Rights Act of 1964,
which banned racial segregation
and discrimination in employment 
“I am not
a crook.”PRESIDENT
RICHARD
NIXON
in 1973,
months before
being forced to
resign over the
Watergate scandal

W
A
L
L
Y
 
M
C
N
A
M
E
E
/
C
O
R
B
I
S

“Let freedom reign!”
PRESIDENT GEORGE W. BUSH,
after being told that sovereign power
in Iraq had officially passed from the
U.S.-led coalition to the Iraqis in
June 2004

B
E
T
T
M
A
N
N
/
C
O
R
B
I
S

Harry Truman
“I believe that it must be the
policy of the United States to
support free peoples who are
resisting attempted subjugation
by armed minorities or by
outside pressure.”
PRESIDENT HARRY TRUMAN, 
announcing the Truman Doctrine to
Congress in 1947
“The basis of our government
being the opinion of the people,
the first object shall be to keep
that right; and were it left for me
to decide whether we should have
a government without newspapers,
or newspapers without
government, I should not hesitate
a moment to choose the latter.”
THOMAS JEFFERSON, as he
discussed the role of the newspapers
and fears that the American press
might have too much freedom,
in 1787 

A
P
 
P
H
O
T
O
/
E
R
I
C
 
D
R
A
P
E
R
 
W
H
I
T
E
 
H
O
U
S
E

N U M B E R S
N U M B E R S  
2 The number of presidents
who are the sons of former
presidents. They are
George W. Bush and John
Quincy Adams. 

50 The  least number
of dogs that have  lived  in
the White House as the
commander  in chief’s
best friend.  

30 The
approximate
number of years
that Ronald
Reagan worked
as a Hollywood
actor before
becoming
president. 

1 The number of presidents
to resign from office. Richard
Nixon has this dubious honor. 

4 The number of terms
Franklin D. Roosevelt served
as president—the only
president to do so before the
Twenty-second Amendment to
the Constitution  limited
presidents to two terms
of office. 

C
O
R
B
I
S

0 Amount of money Herbert
Hoover accepted
as his salary
for being
president 

241

B
E
T
T
M
A
N
N
/
C
O
R
B
I
S

234-243 CH08S4-860053  12/1/04  7:19 PM  Page 242

C h a p t e r   8
C h a p t e r   8
Assessment and Activities
2. How does the winner-take-all system of the
Electoral College operate?
3. What is the process by which cabinet mem-
bers are selected and appointed?
4. What are the two major functions of the Office
of Management and Budget?
5. What are the four key positions on the White
House Office staff?

Self-Check Quiz Visit the United States Government:
Democracy  in Action Web site at gov.glencoe.com and
click on Chapter 8–Self-Check Quizzes to prepare  for
the chapter test.

GOVERNMENT

Reviewing Key Terms
Define each of the following terms and use it in a
sentence that is appropriate to its meaning.
compensation
leak
presidential succession central clearance
national security adviser
electoral vote
elector
press secretary
cabinet

Recalling Facts
1. List four special benefits that the president 
receives while in office.

Understanding Concepts 
1. Growth of Democracy Why do some people criti-
cize plans for the direct popular election of the
president?
2. Constitutional Interpretations The youngest
elected president was John Kennedy at 43.
Why do you think the Framers of the Constitu-
tion in 1787 set the minimum age for presi-
dent at 35?
3. Political Processes Unlike heads of executive
departments, White House staff members are
not required to receive congressional approval.
What are the advantages and disadvantages
of this policy?

The President
Must be 35 years old, natural-born citizen, 14-year resident of
the United States; unwritten qualifications include government
experience, access to money, and moderate political beliefs

Cabinet
• Made up of the heads of the 15 major executive depart-
ments, the vice president, and several other top officials
• Appointed by the president, with the approval of Congress
• Factors  limiting the president’s use of the cabinet  include
conflicting  loyalties and the difficulty of maintaining secrecy
when such a  large group  is  involved  in discussions

Executive Office of the President (EOP)
• Made up of  individuals and agencies that directly assist the
president
• Includes agencies such as the Office of Management and
Budget, the National Security Council, and the Council of
Economic Advisers
• The White House Office staff, usually  longtime personal
supporters of the president, are appointed without Senate
confirmation
• The White House Office has become the most  important
part of the EOP

234-243 CH08S4-860053  12/1/04  7:20 PM  Page 243

C h a p t e r   8
C h a p t e r   8

Critical Thinking
1. Identifying Alternatives Use
a graphic organizer like the
one below to rank the pro-
posals for reforming the
Electoral College system
from most to least desir-
able. Explain your rankings.

proposals

reasons

1.
2.
3.

2. Synthesizing Information
Will a president who relies
on the cabinet for advice
be more or less informed
than one who depends on
close White House advis-
ers? Explain your answer.

Interpreting Political Cartoons Activity
1. What does the 
father think is the
most important 
requirement to 
become president?
2. Does the cartoon
make reference to
any of the formal
qualifications for 
the office of the
president?
3. Do you agree with
the statement
made in the car-
toon? Why or why
not?

“This is America, son, where anybody with
twenty million bucks to spend could end
up being President.”

Applying Technology Skills
Using the Internet Find information about 
current activities or events that are taking 
place at the White House by accessing the official
White House Web site. Using a word processor or
publishing software, summarize the information
you find and format it into a “press release.” 
Analyzing Primary Sources
When George Washington served his two terms as
president, he set a number of precedents for how
the office of the president should be run and what
duties the president would hold. Washington out-
lined many of his beliefs about the presidency in
his two inaugural addresses. The first was deliv-
ered to Congress in 1789. Read the excerpt and
answer the questions that follow.

“By the article establishing the executive department it is
made the duty of the President "to recommend to your
consideration such measures as he shall judge necessary
and expedient." The circumstances under which I now
meet you will acquit me from entering into that subject
further than to refer to the great constitutional charter
under which you are assembled, and which, in defining
your powers, designates the objects to which your atten-
tion is to be given. It will be more consistent with those

circumstances, and far more congenial with the feelings
which actuate me, to substitute, in place of a recommen-
dation of particular measures, the tribute that is due to
the talents, the rectitude, and the patriotism which adorn
the characters selected to devise and adopt them.”

1. How extensive did George Washington believe
the powers of the president should be?
2. What, in Washington’s opinion, should be the
role of the president? Which branch of govern-
ment did he believe should have more power,
the executive or the legislative?

Participating  in 
State Government
Contact your state government
offices to find out the following
information:
• How are the Democratic and Re-
publican electors chosen in your state?
• How and where do the electors cast their 
ballots for president? 
Organize the data chronologically and present 
your findings in a flowchart or informational
brochure.

CHAPTER 8: THE PRESIDENCY 243

