articipating
articipating
I N   G O V E R N M E N T
I N   G O V E R N M E N T
Speaking Out for Justice Providing equal treat-
ment for all is a main goal of the American system
of justice. Study a few selected cases that are being
tried in your local or state courts. After a thought-
ful review of a case, write a summary of what you
think the decision in the case should be. Then, after
the case has been decided, compare the results to
your summary. Did you agree with the court?

352

▲ The Statue of Liberty

stands on Liberty 
Island in New York
Harbor.

Ellis Island

Take a virtual tour of Ellis Island in New York City and
see America as thousands of immigrants have seen it for
the first time. 

Glencoe’s Democracy in Action 
Video Program

Before the turn of the
century, the United States 
experienced a flood of new
immigrants from all over the
world. The Democracy in 
Action video program “Ellis 
Island” presents a photograph-
ic documentary of Ellis Island,
including narratives of former
immigrants’ initial experi-
ences upon arriving in
America.

As you view the video

program, try to picture
yourself adjusting to the
language, customs, laws, freedom, and responsibilities of
citizenship in a new country.

Hands-On Activity

Research your own family genealogy as far

back as possible. Begin by talking with family
members about the ancestors they remember 
or have heard about. Review photo albums and
other family records. Research local offices

such as your city hall to find birth, marriage, or death certificates
of relatives. Use a computer program to map out your family tree. 

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

Interpreting the First Amendment
What are the limits to freedom of speech?
Can your school offer a course on religious 
literature? This chapter will explain your rights
and limits to freedom of religion, freedom of
speech, freedom of the press, freedom of 
assembly, and freedom of petition. 

To learn more about protecting your
constitutional freedoms, view the

Democracy in Action Chapter 13 video lesson:

Protecting Basic Freedoms

★       ★       ★       ★       ★       ★       ★       ★       ★       ★

GOVERNMENT

Chapter Overview Visit the United States
Government: Democracy in Action Web site 
at gov.glencoe.com and click on Chapter
13—Overview to preview chapter information.

354

S e c t i on   1
S e c t i on   1

Constitutional Rights

Reader’s Guide

Key Terms
human rights, incorporation
Find Out
■ How did the Supreme Court extend many rights

mentioned in the first 10 amendments to the
Constitution?

■ Why is the Constitution of the United States

considered to be a living document?

Understanding Concepts
Civic Participation What general assumptions
about its citizens does a democratic government
make?

school  officials 

Censorship Stirs Storm
SNOHOMISH, WASHINGTON, DECEMBER 23, 1996
The  refusal  of high

to
allow  the  student  news-
paper to cover the firing of
a  vice-principal  has  re-
newed  debate  over  school
censorship. Although  the
Supreme  Court’s  1988  de-
cision in Hazelwood School
District v. Kuhlmeier ex-
the  power  of
panded 
school  officials  to  censor
student publications, it has
been  criticized  as  too  limiting  of students’ First
Amendment  freedoms. “How  can  they  teach  real
journalism  if students  aren’t  even  able  to  exercise
their  responsibilities?” says  the  paper’s  editor  about
the Washington controversy. “It’s supposed to be the
student’s voice, not the administrator’s voice.”

Student journalist 

at work

All Americans have basic rights. The belief

in human rights, or fundamental free-
doms, lies  at  the  heart  of the  United
States political system and enables citi-
zens  and  noncitizens  to  worship  as  they  wish,
speak freely, and read and write what they choose.
The  Constitution  guarantees  the  rights  of
United States citizens. Along with the enjoyment
of these rights, however, comes a responsibility to
ensure their strength and endurance. As the Pre-
amble to the Constitution states, “We, the people”
adopted the Constitution, and in many ways, Unit-
ed States citizens remain the keepers of their own
rights. Rights and responsibilities cannot be sepa-
rated. As citizens, people share a common faith in
the power they have to steer the course of govern-
ment. Judge  Learned  Hand  expressed  this  well
when he said:

women; when it dies there, no constitu-
tion, no law, no court can save it; no 
constitution, no law, no court can even 

“Liberty lies in the hearts of men and
do much to help it.”—Judge Learned Hand

If people do not carry out their responsibilities as
citizens, the whole society suffers.

Constitutional Rights

The  Constitution  of the  United  States
guarantees  basic  rights  in  the  Bill  of
Rights, composed of the first 10 amendments,
and  in  several  additional  amendments. The
Framers of the Constitution believed that peo-
ple had rights simply because they were people.
In the words of the Declaration of Indepen-
dence, people “are endowed by their Creator
with certain unalienable rights.” The Constitu-
tion  and  the  Bill  of Rights  inscribe  into  law
those rights that really belong to everyone. The
Bill of Rights, in particular, stands as a written

▲

Freedoms reflected at the newsstand

CHAPTER 13: CONSTITUTIONAL FREEDOMS 355

refused to approve it unless a bill of rights was
added. When the first Congress met in 1789, James
Madison introduced a series of amendments that
became the Bill of Rights in 1791. These amend-
ments placed certain limitations on the national
government  to  prevent  it  from  controlling  the
press, restricting speech, establishing or prohibiting
religion, and limiting other areas of personal liberty.
The Bill of Rights was not intended to limit state
and local governments. An important Supreme
Court case, Barron v. Baltimore 1 (1833), upheld
this view. Chief Justice John Marshall, speaking for
the  Court, ruled  that  the  first  10  amendments
“contain no expression indicating an intention to
apply them to the state governments.”
The  Fourteenth  Amendment As  times
changed, so did the Constitution. The addition of
the Fourteenth Amendment in 1868 paved the way
for a major expansion of individual rights. The
Fourteenth Amendment2 not only defined citi-
zenship (a person born or naturalized in the Unit-
ed States is a citizen of the nation and of his or her
state of residence), but it also laid the groundwork
for making individual rights national. The amend-
ment states in part:

“No State shall make or enforce any law

which shall abridge the privileges or im-
munities of citizens of the United States;
nor shall any State deprive any person of
life, liberty, or property without due

process of law. . . .”

—Fourteenth Amendment, 1868

The Supreme Court has interpreted the due
process clause of the Fourteenth Amendment to
apply the guarantees of the Bill of Rights to state
and  local  governments. Over  the  years  the
Supreme Court has interpreted the word liberty in
the amendment to include all freedoms the First
Amendment guarantees. Thus, no state can de-
prive any person of freedom of speech, press, reli-
gion, or  assembly  because  these  freedoms  are
essential to a person’s liberty.

The Supreme Court has also interpreted the
words  due  process to  include  other  protections 

See the following footnoted materials in the Reference Handbook:
1. Barron v. Baltimore case summary, page 754. 
2. The Constitution, pages 774–799. 

Arms War It’s a long-standing debate.
Gun-rights groups believe that the Second
Amendment gives citizens the right to own
and carry guns. Many gun-control advocates,
however, say the amendment means only that
a state has the right to keep an armed militia.
A 1939 Supreme Court ruling says the
amendment applies only to state militias,
thus allowing the government to limit gun
ownership and sales.

guarantee  that  government  cannot  abuse  the
rights of individuals.

The language of the Bill of Rights is very im-
portant, beginning with the words “Congress shall
make no law. . . .” Today the Bill of Rights offers
protection not only from congressional actions,
but also from acts by state and local governments
that may threaten people’s basic rights.

The Bill of Rights was originally intended as a
protection against the actions of the federal gov-
ernment. A process called incorporation extended
the Bill of Rights to all levels of government. The
Constitution drafted in 1787 did not include a bill
of rights. Because most of the state constitutions of
the time contained bills of rights, the Framers be-
lieved it unnecessary to include another such list of
rights in the national Constitution.

Many state leaders, however, were suspicious
of the new Constitution, and when it was submit-
ted to the states for ratification, a number of states

GOVERNMENT

Student Web Activity Visit the United States
Government: Democracy in Action Web site at
gov.glencoe.com and click on Chapter 13—
Student Web Activities for an activity about 
constitutional rights.

356 CHAPTER 13: CONSTITUTIONAL FREEDOMS

protection 

the Bill of Rights guaran-
tees:
from 
unreasonable  search  and
seizure; the right of the ac-
cused to have a lawyer; and
protection  from  cruel  and
unusual punishment. These
rights have also been applied
to  the  states  through  the
Fourteenth Amendment.

The  Supreme  Court’s
interpretation of the Four-
teenth Amendment nation-
alized  the  Bill  of Rights.
In  the  key  case  of Gitlow
v. New  York 1 (1925), the
Supreme Court ruled that
freedom  of speech  was  a
basic  right  that  no  state
government could deny to
any  person. Since  then
almost  all  of the  Bill  of
Rights has been incorporated. The only excep-
tions are the Second, Third, and Tenth Amend-
ments, the excessive bails and fines prohibition of
the Eighth Amendment, and two judicial proce-
dures contained in the Fifth and Seventh Amend-
ments. As a result, states are not required to use a
grand  jury  to  bring  formal  charges  for  serious

See the following footnoted materials in the Reference Handbook:
1. Gitlow v. New York case summary, page 759. 

Guaranteed Freedoms

Civil Rights Leader Dr. Martin Luther
King, Jr., championed the cause of 
equal rights for all Americans. In what
ways did the Fourteenth Amendment
expand individual rights?

crimes, nor  are  they  re-
quired to have a trial by jury
in civil cases involving more
than $20.
The  Importance  of 
Incorporation The in-
corporation of the Bill of
Rights  has  meant  that
United  States  citizens  in
every  part  of the  country
have the same basic rights.
On the face of it, incorpo-
ration  may  not  seem  sig-
nificant  because 
state
constitutions contain bills
of rights. Yet  in  the  past,
state  governments  have 
ignored individual rights,
denied voting rights to mi-
nority  citizens, and  prac-
ticed  various  forms  of
discrimination. As a result of incorporation, the
Bill of Rights becomes a final safeguard when per-
sonal rights are threatened, proving that the Con-
stitution is a living document.

In practice, nationalization means that citi-
zens who believe that a state or local authority has
denied them their basic rights may take their case
to a federal court. If the decision of a lower federal
court goes against them, they may pursue their
claim all the way to the Supreme Court.

Checking for Understanding
1. Main Idea Use a graphic organizer like the one

Critical Thinking 
6. Making Inferences When it came time to submit

Section  1 Assessment
Section  1 Assessment

below to show the effects of incorporation on the
scope of the Bill of Rights.
Cause: incorporation

Effect:

of Bill of Rights

2. Define human rights, incorporation.
3. Identify Bill of Rights, Fourteenth Amendment.
4. Analyze the impact of the incorporation of the

Bill of Rights.

5. Cite the branch of government that has been 

primarily responsible for the incorporation of the
Bill of Rights.

the new Constitution to the states for ratifica-
tion, why do you think state leaders insisted on
a national Bill of Rights?

Civic Participation Some people have argued
that all Americans should be required to 
perform some type of compulsory service. Write
an editorial for a newspaper either supporting
or opposing the idea of compulsory service.

CHAPTER 13: CONSTITUTIONAL FREEDOMS 357

S e c t i on   2
S e c t i on   2

Freedom of Religion

Reader’s Guide

Key Terms
establishment clause, free exercise clause,
parochial school, secular, abridge, precedent
Find Out
■ What is the difference between the establish-
ment clause and the free exercise clause of
the First Amendment?

■ Why did the Court allow state-supported bus
transportation for parochial schools but ban
their use for field trips?

Understanding Concepts
Cultural Pluralism How does the free exercise
clause protect the diverse cultures and religious
practices in the United States?

BOSTON, MASSACHUSETTS, NOVEMBER 1637

Hutchinson Banished 
The  Massachusetts  General
found  Anne
Hutchinson  guilty  of contra-
local
dicting  the  teachings  of
ministers  and  has  ordered  her
banished from the colony. Puri-
tan leaders accused Hutchinson,
who had been holding religious
meetings  in  her  home  twice  a
week, of undermining their au-
thority  as  interpreters  of scrip-
Anne Hutchinson
they
ture. During  her 
established  that  her  beliefs  dif-
fered  from  the  church’s  position  on  salvation.
Hutchinson plans to settle in Rhode Island, a colony
founded by Roger Williams after he was banished last
year for similar religious offenses. Some of Hutchin-
son’s supporters are expected to accompany her.

Court  has 

trial 

358 CHAPTER 13: CONSTITUTIONAL FREEDOMS

Religion has always been and is today a sig-

nificant  aspect  of American  life. More
than  90  percent  of Americans  identify
with a religion. Although religious toler-
ance developed slowly in the American colonies,
by the time of the Constitution the nation incor-
porated  guarantees  of religious  freedom  in  the
First Amendment.1 The first clause of the amend-
ment, known as the establishment clause, states
that “Congress shall make no law respecting an 
establishment of religion.” The second clause, la-
beled the free exercise clause, prohibits govern-
ment  from  unduly  interfering  with  the  free
exercise of religion. The meaning of these clauses
may seem clear, but their interpretation has led to
a continuing debate in American politics.

The Establishment Clause

In 1801, Baptists in Connecticut—a state
where the Congregational Church was the
official church—wrote to Thomas Jefferson asking
his views about religious liberty. Jefferson wrote
back strongly supporting the First Amendment.
He stated that by passing the First Amendment,
Americans had “declared that their legislature
should ‘make no law respecting an establishment
of religion or prohibiting the free exercise there-
of,’ thus building a wall of separation between
Church and State.”

The phrase “wall of separation” that Jefferson
used is not in the Constitution. He appears to
have used the phrase to stress that the govern-
ment should not establish an official church or
restrict worship. Over time, the idea of a “wall of
separation” has  been  expanded  and  become
very controversial. How high does the “wall of
separation” go? Does it mean that the state and
any church or religious group should have no
contact with each other?

See the following footnoted materials in the Reference Handbook:
1. The Constitution, pages 774–799. 

Religion in Public Life In practice, religion
has  long  been  part  of public  life  in  the  United
States. Although Article VI  of the  Constitution
bans any religious qualification to hold public of-
fice, most government officials take their oaths of
office in the name of God. Since 1864 most of the
nation’s coins have carried the motto “In God We
Trust.” The  Pledge  of Allegiance  contains  the
phrase  “one  nation  under  God.” Many  public
meetings, including daily sessions of Congress and
most state legislatures, open with a prayer.

Government actually encourages religion in
some  ways. For  example, chaplains  serve  with
each  branch  of the  armed  forces. Most  church
property and contributions to religious groups are
tax-exempt.

Attempting to define the proper distance be-
tween the church and state often results in contro-
versy. Under the Constitution the task of resolving
these controversies falls on the Supreme Court. Al-
though the Supreme Court had ruled on several
religious freedom cases, it did not hear one based
on the establishment clause until Everson v. Board
of Education (1947). Since the Everson decision,
the Court has ruled many more times on the es-
tablishment clause. Most of these cases have in-
volved some aspect of religion and education.

Everson v. Board of Education This case
involved a challenge to a New Jersey law allowing
the state to pay for busing students to parochial
schools, schools operated by a church or religious
group. The  law’s  critics  contended  that  the  law
amounted to state support of a religion, in viola-
tion  of the  establishment  clause. Writing  the
Court’s decision, Justice Hugo H. Black defined the
establishment clause:

can set up a church. Neither can pass laws
which aid one religion, aid all religions, or

“Neither a state nor the federal government
prefer one religion over another. . . .”

—Justice Hugo L. Black, 1947

The Court ruled, however, that the New Jersey
law was constitutional. In making the decision, the
Court determined that the law benefited students
rather than aided a religion directly.

Although  this  1947  decision  still  guides  the
Court, the Everson case illustrated uncertainty over
just how high Jefferson’s “wall of separation” should
be. That uncertainty continues today both in the
Court and among the American people.

Constitutional Interpretations

The Establishment
Clause An army chaplain
leads soldiers in voluntary
prayer during the Persian
Gulf War. Why would this
military service not be
considered a violation of
the establishment
clause?

The motto 
“In God We
Trust” first 
appeared on 
U.S. coins in
1864.

CHAPTER 13: CONSTITUTIONAL FREEDOMS 359

Separation of Church and State

test. Since  the  1971  case  of Lemon v.
Kurtzman,3 the Court has used a three-
part test to decide whether such aid vio-
lates  the  establishment  clause. To  be
constitutional, state aid to church schools
must: (l)  have  a  clear  secular, nonreli-
gious purpose; (2) in its main effect nei-
ther advance nor inhibit religion; and (3)
avoid “excessive  government  entangle-
ment with religion.”

In Levitt v. Committee for Public Ed-
ucation 4 (1973), for example, the Court
voided a New York plan to help pay for
parochial  schools  developing  testing
programs. In Committee for Public Edu-
cation v. Regan 5 (1980) the Court per-
mitted New York State to pay parochial
schools to administer and grade tests. In
the 1980 case the state’s department of
education prepared the tests. In the 1973
case  the  tests  were  teacher-prepared,
which the Court considered part of reli-
gious instruction.

Constitutional Principles The Constitution lays down
the principle of church-state separation, so the teaching of
religion to students has always been controversial. Yet 
the House of Representatives opens every session with 
a prayer. Does a constitutional conflict exist in this 
instance? Explain.

State Aid to Parochial Schools Some of
the most controversial debates over church-state re-
lations have focused on the kinds of aid government
can give church-related schools. Since the Everson
decision, more than two-thirds of the states have
given parochial schools aid ranging from driver ed-
ucation to free lunches for students. The Court con-
tinues to hear cases arising from these programs,
finding some constitutional and others not.

For example, in Board of Education v. Allen 1
(1968) the Court upheld state programs to provide
secular, or nonreligious, textbooks to parochial
schools. Although the Everson decision permitted
state-supported bus transportation to and from
school, Wolman v. Walter 2 (1977) banned its use
for field trips.

Why are some forms of aid constitutional and
others not? The answer is in the so-called Lemon

360 CHAPTER 13: CONSTITUTIONAL FREEDOMS

In  Mueller v. Allen 6 (1983)  the
Court upheld a Minnesota law allowing
parents  to  deduct  tuition, textbooks,
and transportation to and from school
from  their  state  income  tax. Public
schools charge little or nothing for these
items, because taxes pay for them. Par-
ents  whose  children  attend  parochial
schools  benefited 
the  de-
duction. Because the law permitted parents of all 
students to take the deduction, it passed the Court’s
three-part test.

In Mitchell v. Helms7 (2000) the Court ruled
that  taxpayer  funds  could  be  used  to  provide 
religious schools with computers, library books,
projectors, televisions, and similar equipment as
long as they are not used for religious purposes.
This  continued  the  Court’s  recent  pattern  of
expanding government aid for parochial schools.

from 

See the following footnoted materials in the Reference Handbook:
1. Board of Education v. Allen case summary, page 755.
2. Wolman v. Walter case summary, page 768. 
3. Lemon v. Kurtzman case summary, page 761. 
4. Levitt v. Committee for Public Education case 

summary, page 761.

5. Committee for Public Education v. Regan case 

summary, page 756. 

6. Mueller v. Allen case summary, page 762. 
7. Mitchell v. Helms case summary, page 762. 

Conflicts over state aid to church schools are
not confined to Christian schools. The Court ruled
in Kiryas Joel v. Grumet 1 (1994) that New York
State could not create a public school district sole-
ly for the benefit of a community of Hasidic Jews.
Release  Time  for  Students Can  public
schools  release  students  from  school  to  attend
classes in religious instruction? The Court first
dealt with this question in McCollum v. Board of
Education 2 (1948). The public schools in Cham-
paign, Illinois, had a program in which religion
teachers came into the schools once a week and
gave instruction to students who desired it. The
Court declared this program unconstitutional be-
cause school classrooms—tax-supported public
facilities—were being used for religious purposes.
Justice Black wrote that the program used tax-sup-
ported public schools “to aid religious groups to
spread their faith.”

Four years later in Zorach v. Clauson, 3 howev-
er, the Court accepted a New York City program
that  allowed  religious  instruction  during  the
school day but away from the public schools. The
Court ruled a release-time program of religious in-
struction was constitutional if carried on in private
rather than public facilities.

Engel v. Vitale In 1962 and 1963 the Court
handed down three controversial decisions affect-
ing prayer and Bible reading in public schools. The
first was Engel v. Vitale, a school prayer case that
began in New York State. The New York Board of
Regents composed a nondenominational prayer
that it urged schools to use: “Almighty God, we ac-
knowledge our dependence upon Thee, and we
beg Thy blessings upon us, our parents, our teach-
ers, and our country.” In New Hyde Park, parents
of 10  students  challenged  the  prayer  in  court.
In 1962 the Court declared the regents’ prayer un-
constitutional, interpreting the First Amendment
to mean the following:

See the following footnoted materials in the Reference Handbook:
1. Kiryas Joel v. Grumet case summary, page 760. 
2. McCollum v. Board of Education case summary, page 761.
3. Zorach v. Clauson case summary, page 768. 
4. Abington School District v. Schempp case summary, page 754.
5. Santa Fe Independent School District v. Doe case summary,

page 765.

of government to compose official prayers
for any group of the American people to
recite as part of a religious program car-

“In this country it is no part of the business
ried on by government.”

—Justice Hugo H. Black, 1962

In his lone dissent from the Engel decision, Jus-
tice  Potter  Stewart  argued  that  the  New  York
prayer was no different from other state-approved
religious expression, such as referring to God in
the Pledge of Allegiance.

Other  School  Prayer  Cases In 1963 the
Court combined a Pennsylvania case—Abington
School District v. Schempp 4—and one from Mary-
land—Murray v. Curlett —for another major deci-
sion on school prayer. In these cases the Court
banned  school-sponsored  Bible  reading  and
recitation of the Lord’s Prayer in public schools.
Because tax-paid teachers conducted the activities
in public buildings, the Court reasoned that these
acts violated the First Amendment.

In 1985 the Court struck down an Alabama
law requiring teachers to observe a moment of si-
lence for “meditation or voluntary prayer” at the
start of each school day. The Court ruled that the
law’s reference to prayer made it an unconstitu-
tional endorsement of religion. In 1992 the Court
also prohibited clergy-led prayers at public school
graduations.

Then, in Santa Fe Independent School District v.
Doe 5 (2000), the Supreme Court ruled that public
school districts cannot let students lead stadium
crowds in prayer before football games. According
to Justice John Paul Stevens, such prayers “over the
school’s public address system by a speaker repre-
senting the student body” violated the separation of
government  and  religion  required  by  the  First
Amendment.

Public reaction to the Court’s rulings has been
divided and heated. Although many people sup-
port  the  Court’s  stance, others  have  bitterly
protested. About half the states have passed mo-
ment-of-silence  laws  that  make  no  mention  of
prayer. Congress has considered several constitu-
tional amendments to overturn these Court deci-
sions, but  has  not  yet  produced  the  two-thirds
majority needed to propose an amendment.

CHAPTER 13: CONSTITUTIONAL FREEDOMS 361

“Although a school may not itself lead or 

direct a religious club, a school that permits
a student-initiated and student-led reli-
gious club to meet after school, just as it
permits any other student group to do, does
not convey the message of state approval or 

endorsement of that particular religion.”

—Justice Sandra Day O’Connor, 1990
Teaching  the  Theory  of  Evolution The
Supreme Court also has applied the establishment
clause  to  classroom  instruction. In  Epperson v.
Arkansas 2 (1968) the justices voided an Arkansas
law  that  banned  teaching  evolution  in  public
schools. The Court ruled that “the state has no le-
gitimate interest in protecting any or all religions
from views distasteful to them.”

Some state legislatures passed laws that re-
quired teaching the Bible’s account of creation
with evolution as an alternative point of view. In
1987, however, the  Court  struck  down  these
laws. In Edwards v. Aguillard 3 the Court ruled
that a law requiring the teaching of creationism
violated the establishment clause because its pri-
mary purpose was “to endorse a particular reli-
gious doctrine.”
Other Establishment Issues Not all estab-
lishment  clause  issues  concern  education. For 
example, the Supreme Court has also applied the
separation of church and state to public Christmas 
displays, which have caused controversy in some
communities. In Lynch v. Donnelly 4 (1984) the
Court  allowed  the  city  of Pawtucket, Rhode 
Island, to  display  a  Nativity  scene  with  secular
items such as a Christmas tree and a sleigh and
reindeer. In 1989 the Court ruled that a publicly
funded Nativity scene by itself violated the Consti-
tution, in  County  of Allegheny  v. ACLU .5  The 
justices  upheld  placing  a  menorah—a  cande-
labrum with seven or nine candles that is used in
Jewish worship—alongside a Christmas tree at city
hall the same year, however.

See the following footnoted materials in the Reference Handbook:
1. Westside Community Schools v. Mergens case summary,

page 767. 

2. Epperson v. Arkansas case summary, page 757. 
3. Edwards v. Aguillard case summary, page 757. 
4. Lynch v. Donnelly case summary, page 761.
5. County of Allegheny v. ACLU case summary, page 754. 

Practicing Religion A San Marcos, Texas high
school football team voluntarily prays before a game.
On what grounds does the Supreme Court reject
schools conducting mandatory prayers?

Equal Access Act An exception to the Court’s
imposed limits on prayer in public schools is the
Equal Access Act passed by Congress in 1984. The
Act  allows public high schools receiving federal
funds to permit student religious groups to hold
meetings in the school. The bill’s sponsors made it
clear that they intended to provide opportunity for
student prayer groups in public schools, a position
that had overwhelming support in both houses of
Congress.

The  Court  ruled  the  law  constitutional  in
1990. The case arose from the request of students
at Westside High School in Omaha, Nebraska, to
form a club for Bible reading and prayer. Student
organizers said that membership would be com-
pletely voluntary and that it would be open to stu-
dents of any religion. When school officials refused
to  let  the  group  meet  in  the  school  like  other
school clubs, the students sued. In Westside Com-
munity Schools v. Mergens 1 (1990) the Court ruled
as follows:

362 CHAPTER 13: CONSTITUTIONAL FREEDOMS

The Court has also ruled that its ban on school
prayer does not extend to government meetings. In
Marsh v. Chambers 1 (1983) the justices noted that
prayers have been offered in legislatures since colo-
nial times, and that, unlike students, legislators are
not  “susceptible  to  religious  indoctrination.”
Therefore, the establishment clause is not violated
by such prayers.

The Free Exercise Clause

In  addition  to  banning  an  established
church, the First Amendment forbids laws
“prohibiting the free exercise of religion.” But in
interpreting this free exercise clause, the Supreme
Court makes an important distinction between
belief and practice. The court has ruled that the
right to religious belief is absolute. It has applied
some restrictions, however, to the practice of those
beliefs.
Religious Practice May Be Limited The
Supreme Court has never permitted religious free-
dom to justify any behavior, particularly when reli-
gious  practices  conflict  with  criminal  laws. The
Court  first  dealt  with  this  issue  in  the  case  of
Reynolds v. United States 2 (1879). George Reynolds,
a Mormon who lived in Utah, had two wives and
was convicted of polygamy. Reynolds’s religion per-
mitted polygamy, but federal law prohibited it. He
appealed  his  conviction  to  the  Supreme  Court,
claiming that the law abridged, or limited, freedom
of religion. The Court, however, upheld his convic-
tion. The Reynolds case established that people are
not free to worship in ways that violate laws protect-
ing the health, safety, or morals of the community.
Over the years the Supreme Court has consis-
tently followed this principle, upholding a variety of
restrictive laws. For example, in Jacobson v. Massa-
chusetts 3 (1905) the Court upheld compulsory vac-
cination  laws  for  students, even  though  some
religions prohibit it. In Oregon v. Smith 4 (1990) the
Court denied unemployment benefits to a worker
fired for using drugs as part of a religious ceremony.
In  1993  Congress  passed  and  President  Bill
Clinton signed the Religious Freedom Restoration
Act. This law was designed to overturn the princi-
ple the Court set forth in the Smith case. The act
states that people have the right to perform their re-
ligious rituals unless those rituals are prohibited by

a law that is narrowly tailored and is the “least re-
strictive means of furthering a compelling [state]
interest.” The act says Congress has the power to set
aside state laws that violate this principle. The act
did not survive long. In June 1997 the Court ruled
in City of Boerne, Texas v. Flores 5 that the act was
unconstitutional on several grounds.

While government may limit some religious
practices, the Court also has ruled that a number
of other restrictions violate the free exercise clause.
For example, in Wisconsin v. Yoder 6 (1972), the
Court  decided  that  the  state  could  not  require
Amish  parents  to  send  their  children  to  public
school  beyond  the  eighth  grade. To  do  so, the
Court ruled, would violate long-held Amish reli-
gious beliefs that were “intimately related to daily
living” and would present “a very real threat of un-
dermining the Amish community.”

The Flag Salute Cases Two of the most-dis-
cussed free exercise cases concerned whether chil-
dren could be forced to salute the American flag.
The  first  case  began  in  1936  when  Lillian  and
William Gobitis, ages 10 and 12, were expelled from
school  for  refusing  to  salute  the  flag. As 
Jehovah’s Witnesses, the children and their parents
believed  saluting  the  flag  violated  the  Christian
commandment against bowing down to any graven
image. In Minersville School District v. Gobitis (1940)
the Court upheld the school regulation. The flag was
a patriotic symbol, the Court ruled, and requiring
the salute did not infringe on religious freedom.

After the Gobitis decision, the West Virginia
legislature passed an act requiring public schools
in the state to conduct classes in civics, history, and
the federal and state constitutions. The State Board
of Education followed this legislation by directing
that all students and teachers in West Virginia’s
public schools salute the flag and recite the Pledge
of Allegiance as part of regular school activities.

See the following footnoted materials in the Reference Handbook:
1. Marsh v. Chambers case summary, page 761. 
2. Reynolds v. United States case summary, page 764. 
3. Jacobson v. Massachusetts case summary, page 760. 
4. Oregon v. Smith case summary, page 763. 
5. City of Boerne, Texas v. Flores case summary, page 756. 
6. Wisconsin v. Yoder case summary, page 768.

CHAPTER 13: CONSTITUTIONAL FREEDOMS 363

Defending Beliefs

Interpreting the First
Amendment Nine-year-
old Jana Gobitis, with her
hands at her sides, refus-
es to salute the flag in 
her third-grade classroom
in 1965. Unlike her father,
William, Jana never faced
expulsion from school for
her beliefs. How did the
Supreme Court, in 1943,
change its interpretation
of the First Amendment
right of free exercise 
of religion?

the  Gobitis decision  and  held
such laws to be an unconstitu-
tional interference with the free
exercise of religion. The Court
concluded in West Virginia State
Board  of Education v. Barnette
(1943) that patriotism could be
achieved without forcing people
to violate their religious beliefs:

“To believe that patrio-

tism will not flourish 
if patriotic ceremonies
are voluntary and 
spontaneous instead 
of a compulsory routine
is to make an unflatter-
ing estimate of the ap-
peal of our institutions 

to free minds.”—Justice Robert 

Jackson, 1943

Failure to comply with this requirement constitut-
ed insubordination for which a student was to be
expelled from school and treated as a delinquent.
In addition, the parents of students who failed to
comply were liable to prosecution and a penalty of
30 days in jail and a $50 fine.

When a member of Jehovah’s Witnesses ap-
pealed the state’s requirement, the Court overruled

The  flag  salute  cases  illustrate  how  the
Supreme Court can change its interpretation of
the Constitution. The Court usually follows prece-
dent, decisions made on the same issue in earlier
cases. As one justice put it, however, “when con-
vinced of former error, this Court has never felt
constrained to follow precedent.”

Section  2 Assessment
Section  2 Assessment

Checking for Understanding
1. Main Idea Use a Venn diagram like the one to
the right to show the difference between the 
establishment clause 
and the free exercise 
clause of the First 
Amendment and what 
they have in common.

Establishment
xxClause

Free
xExercise
Clause

both

2. Define establishment clause, free exercise
clause, parochial school, secular, abridge, 
precedent.

3. Identify Equal Access Act.
4. What three-part test does the Supreme Court

use to determine if government aid to parochial
education is constitutional?

364 CHAPTER 13: CONSTITUTIONAL FREEDOMS

Critical Thinking
5. Recognizing Ideologies Do you think that prayer
in public schools is permitted or disallowed by the
establishment clause and/or the free exercise 
clause of the First Amendment? Explain your answer.

Cultural Pluralism Study the free exercise 
and establishment clauses. Take a position 
on the following: Government buildings should
be allowed to place the motto “In God We
Trust” in public view. Outline the reasons for
your position, then create a banner or poster
stating your position.

CASES TO DEBATE

Clark v. Community for
Creative Non-Violence, 1984 
Political demonstrations
often bring the govern-
ment’s need to maintain

order in conflict with the rights of free speech and free assembly. Does
the Constitution give groups the right to camp in parks to promote 
political ideas? The Court dealt with this issue in Clark v. Community
for Creative Non-Violence.

Lafayette Park statue

Background of the Case

In 1982 a group, the Community for Creative
Non-Violence (CCNV), applied to the National Park
Service (NPS) for a permit to conduct round-the-
clock demonstrations in Lafayette Park and the
Mall in Washington, D.C. The CCNV wanted to set
up 60 large tents for overnight camping in both
parks to call attention to the problems of the
homeless. The NPS issued the permit but refused
to allow the CCNV to sleep overnight in tents.
Camping in national parks is permitted only in
campgrounds designated for that purpose, and no
such campgrounds had ever been set up in either
Lafayette Park or the Mall. The CCNV filed suit
claiming a violation of their First Amendment
rights. A district court ruled in favor of the NPS; 
the court of appeals then ruled for the CCNV.

The Constitutional Issue

The Court stated, “The issue in this case is wheth-

er a National Park Service regulation prohibiting

camping in certain parks violates the First Amend-
ment when applied to prohibit demonstrators from
sleeping in Lafayette Park and the Mall.” The CCNV
argued that sleeping in the tents was essential to
convey to people “the central reality of homeless-
ness.” Further, the group explained that it would be
impossible to get the poor and homeless to partici-
pate without the incentive of sleeping space and a
hot meal. The CCNV also claimed that while the
camping might interfere in some ways with use of
the parks by others, the NPS did not have a truly sub-
stantial governmental interest in banning camping.
The NPS countered that the regulation against
sleeping except in designated campsites was “con-
tent neutral;” it was not targeted against the CCNV’s
message about the homeless. Further, the govern-
ment did have a substantial interest in keeping the
parks attractive and readily available to the millions
who wanted to enjoy them. If non-demonstrators
were not allowed to camp in the two parks, 
demonstrators should not be treated any differently, 
especially since there were other ways to get their
political message across to the public.

Debating the Case
Debating the Case

Questions to Consider
1. What governmental interest was involved in this

case?

2. Was the regulation intended to suppress the

CCNV’s message about the homeless?

3. What could be the far-reaching consequence of

allowing the CCNV to camp in the parks?

You Be the Judge

In your opinion, did the NPS regulation violate
the First Amendment? Was a substantial govern-
mental interest served by banning camping as part
of the CCNV’s demonstration? Did the CCNV have
other ways to use the parks to communicate a 
message about the problems of the homeless?

365

S e c t i on   3
S e c t i on   3

Freedom of Speech

Reader’s Guide

Key Terms
pure speech, symbolic speech, seditious speech,
defamatory speech, slander, libel
Find Out
■ How has the Supreme Court applied the princi-
ples of “clear and present danger” and the bad
tendency doctrine in determining free speech?
■ What speech is protected by the First Amend-

ment, and what speech is not protected?

Understanding Concepts
Civil Liberties What is the intent of the preferred
position doctrine? 

License Plates OK
BALTIMORE, MARYLAND, FEBRUARY 26, 1997

Afederal 

judge
has  ruled  that
the  First  Amend-
ment  does  not
allow  the  govern-
ment to ban license
A Maryland license plate
plates  that  show-
case  the  Confeder-
ate flag. In recent years Maryland has issued special
plates  to  over  300  groups, including  the  Sons  of
Confederate Veterans  who  petitioned  for  the  Con-
federate  flag  plates. The  group  sued  when  the  state
recalled the plates after complaints that the flag’s ties
to  slavery  made  them  offensive. “The  Court  just
made it real clear you can’t discriminate against this
group because of its political viewpoint,” an attorney
for  the  group  noted. “The  government  cannot  pick
and choose the viewpoint it finds to be correct.”

366 CHAPTER 13: CONSTITUTIONAL FREEDOMS

Democratic  government  requires  that

every  person  have  the  right  to  speak
freely. Most people agree in principle
with the right of free speech. Everyone
wants it for themselves, but they are sometimes
tempted to deny it to others whose beliefs differ
greatly from their own. The First Amendment ex-
ists to protect ideas that may be unpopular or dif-
fer from the majority. Popular ideas usually need
little protection, but those who support democra-
cy cherish diversity of opinion.

Types of Speech

What exactly is speech? Clearly, talking with
neighbors or addressing the senior class in 
a school assembly is speech. Are students who wear
black armbands to protest a school policy engaging
in an act of “speech” that the First Amendment
protects? Is demonstrating in front of a govern-
ment  building  to  protest  a  new  law  a  form  of
speech? To answer such questions, the Supreme
Court has distinguished two general categories 
of speech that the First Amendment protects.

The verbal expression of thought and opin-
ion before an audience that has chosen to listen,
or pure speech, is the most common form of
speech. Pure speech may be delivered calmly in
the  privacy  of one’s  home  or  passionately  in
front of a crowd. Because pure speech relies only
on the power of words to communicate ideas,
the Supreme Court traditionally has provided
the strongest protection of pure speech against
government control.

Symbolic speech (sometimes called expres-
sive conduct) involves using actions and sym-
bols, in  addition  to  or  instead  of words, to
express opinions. During the Vietnam War, for
example, protestors burned their draft cards to
express their opposition to the war. Other pro-
testors have burned the American flag to ex-
press their displeasure with the government.
Because symbolic speech involves actions, it

may be subject to government restrictions that do
not  apply  to  pure  speech. For  example, the
Supreme Court has ruled that the First Amend-
ment does not permit expressive conduct that en-
dangers public safety.

The Supreme Court has generally followed a
three-part test when reviewing cases involving ex-
pressive conduct. This test was established in 1968
in the case of United States v. O’Brien,1 when the
government upheld the arrest of four men who
burned their draft cards to protest the Vietnam
War. In that case the Court ruled that a government
can regulate or forbid expressive conduct if the reg-
ulation (1) falls within the constitutional power of
government, (2) is narrowly drawn to further a
substantial government interest that is unrelated to
the suppression of free speech, and (3) leaves open
ample alternative channels of communication.

Since the O’Brien decision the Court has said
the First Amendment protected the right to wear
black armbands in high schools to protest the Viet-
nam War (Tinker v. Des Moines School District,2
1969). In 1989 in Texas v. Johnson 3 it held flag burn-
ing was protected symbolic speech. The Court reaf-
firmed this position in United States v. Eichman 4
(1990), declaring the federal Flag Protection Act of

1989 unconstitutional. On the other side, in Frisby
v. Schultz 5 (1988) the Court held a city may limit
picketing in front of a private residence by protes-
tors. In Hill v. Colorado6 (2000) the Court also up-
held a Colorado law that prohibits a person from
approaching another person without that person’s
consent in order to speak or offer literature to that
person within 100 feet of a health care facility. In
these decisions the Court placed the government’s
interest in protecting the right to privacy ahead of
the right of demonstrators to expressive conduct.

Regulating Speech

Because the rights of free speech must be
balanced against the need to protect society,
some restraints on speech exist. Congress and state
legislatures, for example, have outlawed seditious
speech—any speech urging resistance to lawful

See the following footnoted materials in the Reference Handbook:
1. United States v. O’Brien case summary, page 767. 
2. Tinker v. Des Moines School District case summary,

page 766. 

3. Texas v. Johnson case summary, page 765. 
4. United States v. Eichman case summary, page 766. 
5. Frisby v. Schultz case summary, page 758. 
6. Hill v. Colorado case summary, page 759. 

Symbolic Speech

Demonstrative Actions
During the Vietnam War, thou-
sands of defiant young people
challenged the idea that citi-
zens have a military obligation
to their country. Disabled for-
mer Marine Ron Kovic leads
protesting Vietnam Veterans
Against the War in Miami,
Florida, in 1972. Other Ameri-
can men burned their draft
cards in protest. What meth-
ods of symbolic speech are
used today?

CHAPTER 13: CONSTITUTIONAL FREEDOMS 367

Justice Oliver Wendell

Holmes, Jr.

authority or advocating the overthrow of the gov-
ernment. How far can government go in limiting
free speech? When does speech lose the protection
of the First Amendment? Different philoso-
phies  about  the  limits  on  free  speech
have emerged as the Supreme Court
has wrestled with the issue of where
to draw the line.

During the twentieth centu-
ry  the  Court  has  developed
three constitutional tests to es-
tablish limits on speech. These
principles are not precisely de-
fined but are general guidelines
that the courts have used when
deciding particular cases. They
are: (l) the “clear and present dan-
ger” rule; (2) the bad tendency doc-
trine; and (3) the preferred position
doctrine.
Clear  and  Present  Danger
When the speech in question clearly
presents  an  immediate  danger, the
First Amendment does not protect it. If a conflict
between free expression and the demands of pub-
lic safety occurs, the judges frequently rely on the
“clear  and  present  danger” rule. Justice  Oliver
Wendell Holmes, Jr., developed the “clear and pre-
sent danger” test in Schenck v. United States (1919).

Schenckv. United States Charles Schenck,
the general secretary of the Socialist Party, was
convicted of printing and distributing leaflets that
urged draftees to obstruct the war effort during
World War I. The government claimed his actions
violated the Espionage Act of 1917 that made it a
crime to “willfully utter, print, write, or publish
any disloyal, profane, scurrilous or abusive lan-
guage” about the government. Schenck argued that
the First Amendment protected his actions.

The Supreme Court rejected Schenck’s argu-
ment  and  upheld  his  conviction. Ordinarily 
the  First  Amendment  would  protect  Schenck’s
“speech,” the Court said. During wartime, howev-
er, his  actions  threatened  the  well-being  of the 
nation:

368 CHAPTER 13: CONSTITUTIONAL FREEDOMS

“The question in every case is whether the

words are used in such circumstances and
are of such a nature as to create a clear
and present danger that they will bring
about the substantive evils that Con-

gress has a right to prevent. . . .

When a nation is at war many

things that might be said in time
of peace . . . will not be en-
dured [and] . . . no Court
could regard them as protect-
ed by any constitutional

right.”—Justice Oliver Wendell 

Holmes, Jr., 1919

The Bad Tendency Doctrine
Some Supreme Court justices con-
sidered the “clear and present dan-
ger” principle insufficient to protect
the federal government’s substantial
interests. They moved to a standard
which  would  restrict  even  more
speech. Several years after the Schenck ruling, in the
case of Gitlow v. New York 1 (1925), the Court held
speech could be restricted even if it had only a ten-
dency to lead to illegal action, establishing the bad
tendency doctrine. This doctrine has not generally
had the support of the Supreme Court itself since
the  1920s. It  still, however, reflects  the  views  of
many Americans. Supporters of this position ac-
knowledge that it might occasionally lead to laws
unnecessarily limiting speech. They believe, howev-
er, that society’s need to maintain order more than
balances any damages done to basic freedoms.
The  Preferred  Position  Doctrine First 
developed by the Court during the 1940s, the pre-
ferred position doctrine holds that First Amend-
ment freedoms are more fundamental than other
freedoms because they provide the basis of all lib-
erties. Thus, First Amendment freedoms hold a
preferred position over competing interests. Any
law limiting these freedoms should be presumed
unconstitutional unless the government can show
it is absolutely necessary.

See the following footnoted materials in the Reference Handbook:
1. Gitlow v. New York case summary, page 759. 

Court determined that even if a newspaper story
about an Alabama police commissioner was false,
it  was  protected  speech  unless  the  statement 
was made with the knowledge that it was false,
or with reckless disregard of whether it was false 
or not.

The Court allowed some defamatory speech
about public officials for fear that criticism of gov-
ernment, a basic constitutional right, might be si-
lenced  if individuals  could  be  sued  for  their
statements. In later years the justices have extended

See the following footnoted materials in the Reference Handbook:
1. Dennis v. United States case summary, page 757. 
2. Yates v. United States case summary, page 768. 
3. Brandenburg v. Ohio case summary, page 755. 
4. New York Times Co. v. Sullivan case summary, 

page 762. 

Petitioning for Change

Sedition Laws The Espionage Act of 1917 ex-
pired at the end of World War I. Later, in the 1940s
and 1950s, Congress passed three sedition laws
that applied in peacetime as well as during war.
One of these, the Smith Act, made it a crime to 
advocate revolution. In Dennis v. United States 1
(1951) the Court applied the “clear and present
danger” test to uphold the conviction of 11 Com-
munist Party leaders under the act. In later cases,
however, the Court sharply narrowed its definition
of seditious speech.

In  Yates v. United  States 2 (1957)  the  Court
overturned convictions of several other Commu-
nist  Party  members. It  decided  that  merely  ex-
pressing the opinion that the government should
be overthrown cannot be illegal. Thus, the Court
distinguished between urging people to believe in
an action and urging them to take action.

In Brandenburg v. Ohio3 (1969) the Court fur-
ther narrowed its definition of seditious speech.
When  Clarence  Brandenburg, a  Ku  Klux  Klan
leader, refused a police order to end a rally and
cross burning, he was arrested. The Court ruled in
his favor, however, stating that advocating the use
of force may not be forbidden “except where such
advocacy is directed to inciting or producing im-
minent lawless action and is likely to produce such
action.” The First Amendment does not protect
speech intended to advocate immediate and con-
crete acts of violence.

Other Speech Not Protected 

Other forms of speech, less protected than
so-called seditious speech, are not protected
by the First Amendment. Defamatory speech and
“fighting words” fall outside the First Amendment,
as do some forms of student speech.
Defamatory Speech The First Amendment
does  not  protect  defamatory  speech, or  false
speech that damages a person’s good name, char-
acter, or reputation. Defamatory speech falls into
two categories. Slander is spoken; libel is written.
Thus, someone may be sued in a civil court and 
ordered to pay damages for making false, damag-
ing statements about someone else.

The Court has limited the right of public offi-
cials, however, to recover damages for defamation.
In  New  York  Times  Co. v. Sullivan 4 (1964)  the

Active Free Speech One way citizens can
freely express opinions is by signing petitions 
concerning public issues they want addressed.
What did the Supreme Court say about 
free speech, such as petitioning, in the 
preferred position doctrine?

CHAPTER 13: CONSTITUTIONAL FREEDOMS 369

this protection to statements about public figures
in  general. Political  candidates  are  included, of
course, but  so  are  professional  entertainers  and 
athletes, and  even  private  citizens  who  become
newsworthy. In  Hustler  Magazine v. Falwell 1
(1988), for example, the Court ruled that Reverend
Jerry Falwell, a well-known conservative minister,
could not collect damages for words that might 
intentionally inflict emotional distress.
“Fighting  Words” In  1942  the  Supreme
Court ruled that words that are so insulting that
they provoke immediate violence do not constitute
protected speech. The Court upheld a state law
that prohibited any person from speaking “any of-
fensive, derisive, or annoying word to any other
person  who  is  lawfully  in  any  street  or  public
place.” In Chaplinsky v. New Hampshire 2 (1942)
the Court held that:

“There are certain well-defined and nar-

rowly limited classes of speech, the preven-
tion of which has never been thought to
raise any constitutional problem. These 
include the lewd and obscene, the profane,
the libelous, and the insulting or “fighting”
words—those which by their very utter-
ance inflict injury or tend to incite an 

immediate breach of the peace.”

—Justice Frank Murphy, 1942

Student Speech The Court has limited stu-
dent speech as well. In the 1969 Tinker case, the
Supreme Court made it clear that students do not
give up all their rights to free speech while in high
school. Two Court decisions, however, have great-
ly  narrowed  students’ First  Amendment  rights
while expanding the authority of school officials.
In Bethel School District v. Fraser 3 (1986), the
Court ruled the First Amendment does not pre-
vent officials from suspending students for lewd or
indecent speech at school events, even though the
same speech would be protected outside the school
building. The Court held that school officials can
decide “what manner of speech in the classroom or
in school assembly is appropriate.”

Two years later, in Hazelwood School District v.
Kuhlmeier 4 (1988), the Court held that school of-
ficials have sweeping authority to regulate student
speech in school-sponsored newspapers, theatrical
productions, and other activities. Justice Byron
White drew a distinction between “a student’s per-
sonal  expression,” which  the  First  Amendment
protects, and speech that occurs “as part of the
school curriculum.”

See the following footnoted materials in the Reference Handbook:
1. Hustler Magazine v. Falwell case summary, page 759. 
2. Chaplinsky v. New Hampshire case summary, page 756.
3. Bethel School District v. Fraser case summary, page 755. 
4. Hazelwood School District v. Kuhlmeier case summary, 

page 759.

Section  3 Assessment
Section  3 Assessment

Checking for Understanding
1. Main  Idea Use a Venn 

diagram like the one 
shown here to explain 
the difference between 
slander and libel. 

2. Define pure speech, 

Defamatory Speech

slander

libel

symbolic speech, seditious 
speech, defamatory speech, slander, libel.

3. Identify “clear and present danger.”
4. What three tests does the Supreme Court use 

to set limits on free speech?

5. What types of speech does the First Amendment

not protect?

370 CHAPTER 13: CONSTITUTIONAL FREEDOMS

Critical Thinking
6. Making Comparisons How does freedom of
speech in the United States differ in wartime
and in peacetime? Refer to Supreme Court 
decisions in your answer.

Civil Liberties The Supreme Court has held
that First Amendment freedoms are more fun-
damental than others. Read a Court decision in
this chapter and create a political cartoon sup-
porting or opposing the Court’s view. Post your
cartoon on a bulletin board and challenge other
students to guess the case that it identifies.

S e c t i on   4
S e c t i on   4

Freedom of the Press

Reader’s Guide

Key Terms
prior restraint, sequester, gag order, shield laws
Find Out
■ What is the Supreme Court’s opinion on prior

restraint?

■ How has the Supreme Court ruled when the
presence of the media could affect a court
trial?

Understanding Concepts
Civil Liberties Some people perceive an adversar-
ial relationship between the government and the
press. Is this so? Why or why not?

TERRE HAUTE, INDIANA, JUNE 11, 2001

Judge Controls Courtroom
Timothy  McVeigh  was

executed  today  for  the
1995 bombing of the Okla-
homa City federal building
that killed 168 people. Dur-
ing  the  trial, Judge  Richard
P. Matsch  was  determined
to  maintain  control  and
not let it turn into a media
event. He issued a gag order
for  both  prosecuting  and
Weighing justice and
refused
defense 
freedom of the press
permission  for  the  trial  to
be  played  on  closed  circuit
television, and  rejected  a  media  plea  to  remove  a
screen that concealed jurors from spectators. Journal-
ists claimed the gag order violated their First Amend-
ment rights. Judge Matsch stood firm and refused to
remove the nondisclosure order.

lawyers,

At times, the right of the press to gather

and publish information conflicts with
other  important  rights. Judge  Richard
Matsch’s rulings in the 1997 Timothy
McVeigh terrorist case were a very high-profile ex-
ample of such conflict. Most of the time freedom
of the press is protected because it is closely relat-
ed to freedom of speech. It moves free speech one
step further by allowing opinions to be written and
circulated or broadcast. In today’s world the press
includes magazines, radio, and television along
with newspapers because of their roles in spread-
ing news and opinions.

Prior Restraint Forbidden

In many nations prior restraint—censor-
ship of information before it is published—
is  a  common  way  for  government  to  control
information  and  limit  freedom. In  the  United
States, however, the Supreme Court has ruled that
the press may be censored in advance only in cases
relating directly to national security. Two Court
decisions illustrate this principle.

Near v.  Minnesota This  1931  case  con-
cerned  a  Minnesota  law  prohibiting  the  pub-
lication  of any  “malicious, scandalous, or 
defamatory” newspapers or magazines. An acid-
tongued  editor  of a  Minneapolis  paper  had
called local officials “gangsters” and “grafters.”
Acting under the Minnesota law, local officials
obtained a court injunction to halt publication.
By a 5-to-4 vote, the Supreme Court lifted
the injunction. The Court ruled the Minnesota
law unconstitutional because it involved prior
restraint. For years the Near case defined the
Supreme Court’s position on censorship. The
Court stressed that a free press means freedom
from government censorship.

CHAPTER 13: CONSTITUTIONAL FREEDOMS 371

New York Times Co. v. United States
The Supreme Court reaffirmed its position in New
York  Times  Co. v. United  States (1971)—widely
known as the Pentagon Papers case. In 1971 a for-
mer Pentagon employee leaked to the New York
Times a secret government report outlining the
history of United States involvement in the Viet-
nam War. This report, which became known as the
Pentagon Papers, contained hundreds of govern-
ment  documents, many  of them  secret  cables,
memos, and plans.

Realizing  the  Pentagon  Papers  showed  that
former government officials had lied to the Amer-
ican  people  about  the  war, the New York Times
began to publish parts of the report. The govern-
ment tried to stop further publication of the pa-
pers, arguing  that  national  security  would  be
endangered  and  that  the  documents  had  been
stolen from the Defense Department.

A  divided  Court  rejected  the  government’s
claims. The Court ruled that stopping publication
would  be  prior  restraint. One  justice, Justice
William  O. Douglas, noted  that “the  dominant

purpose of the First Amendment was to prohibit
the widespread practice of governmental suppres-
sion of embarrassing information.” Justice Hugo L.
Black added:

not the governors. . . . The press was pro-
tected so that it could bare the secrets of

“The press [is] to serve the governed and
government and inform the people.”

—Justice Hugo L. Black, 1971

Fair Trials and Free Press 

In recent years the First Amendment right
of a free press and the Sixth Amendment
right to a fair trial have sometimes conflicted. Does
the press have the right to publish information that
might influence the outcome of a trial? Can courts
issue orders that limit news gathering in order to
increase the chances of a fair trial and to protect
the validity of a jury’s deliberations? Do reporters
have the right to withhold sources of information
that may be important to a trial?

National Security vs. Free Press

▲

The Court’s decision in New York Times Co.
v. United States affected newspapers nation-
wide. Here the first edition of The Washing-
ton Post rolls off the presses immediately
after the Court’s decision on June 30, 1971.

Defense Department official Daniel Ellsberg
(right) leaked the Pentagon Papers to the
New York Times. The Times began publishing
the papers on June 13, 1971. On June 15,
the government halted publication of the pa-
pers. With uncharacteristic speed the case
reached the Supreme Court—within the next
10 days.
▲

Responsibility of the
Press In your opinion,
was national security
threatened by publica-
tion of the Pentagon
Papers? Explain.

372 CHAPTER 13: CONSTITUTIONAL FREEDOMS

A Free but Restricted Press

Sheppardv. Maxwell Pretrial and
courtroom publicity and news stories
about the crime can make it difficult to
secure a jury capable of fairly deciding
the case. In Sheppard v. Maxwell (1966)
the  Supreme  Court  overturned  the
1954  conviction  of Samuel  H. Shep-
pard, for just such reasons.

A prominent Cleveland physician,
Sheppard was convicted of killing his
wife. The case had attracted sensation-
al press coverage. Pretrial news reports
practically called Sheppard guilty. Dur-
ing the trial reporters interviewed wit-
nesses  and  published  information
damaging to Sheppard.

The  Supreme  Court  ruled  that
press  coverage  had  interfered  with
Sheppard’s right to a fair trial. Shep-
pard was later found not guilty. In the
Sheppard decision, the Court described
several measures judges might take to
restrain press coverage of a trial. These
included: (1) moving the trial to reduce
pretrial publicity; (2) limiting the number of re-
porters in the courtroom; (3) placing controls on
reporters’ conduct in the courtroom; (4) isolating
witnesses and jurors from the press; and (5) having
the jury sequestered, or kept isolated, until the
trial is over.

Gag  Orders  Unconstitutional After  the
Sheppard case, a number of trial judges began to
use so-called gag orders to restrain the press. A gag
order is an order by a judge barring the press from
publishing certain types of information about a
pending court case.

In October 1975 a man killed six members of
a Nebraska family. Details of the crime were so
sensational that a local judge prohibited news sto-
ries about a pretrial hearing. The gag order was
challenged and eventually came to the Supreme
Court  as  Nebraska  Press  Association v. Stuart 1
(1976). The  Court  ruled  that  the  Nebraska  gag
order was too vague and overbroad to satisfy the
First Amendment.

Justice and the Media Press coverage of certain trials
is limited by order of the judge. Here members of the
press, barred from the courtroom, wait for a chance to in-
terview participants in order to report on court happenings.
Why would a judge bar the press from a courtroom or
have a jury sequestered?

Press Access to Trials In the Nebraska case,
reporters were permitted in court, even though the
trial judge forbade the press to report on the pro-
ceedings. In  Gannett  Co., Inc. v. DePasquale 2
(1979) the Supreme Court ruled that the public
and press could be barred from certain pretrial
hearings  if the  trial  judge  found  a “reasonable
probability” that publicity would harm the defen-
dant’s right to a fair trial. Since then, the Court has
modified the Gannett decision, limiting the exclu-
sion of the press only to pretrial hearings dealing
with suppression of evidence. In Richmond News-
papers, Inc. v. Virginia 3 (1980) and later cases, the
Court ruled that trials, jury selections, and prelim-
inary hearings must be open to the press and the
public except under limited circumstances.

See the following footnoted materials in the Reference Handbook:
1. Nebraska Press Association v. Stuart case 

summary, page 762. 

2. Gannett Co., Inc. v. DePasquale case summary, 

page 758. 

3. Richmond Newspapers, Inc. v. Virginia case 

summary, page 764. 

CHAPTER 13: CONSTITUTIONAL FREEDOMS 373

Framers Facing Tomorrow’s World

The Constitution and Technology In this
artist’s rendering, Thomas Jefferson and James
Madison ponder the technology of today. The
Framers of our government could not have fore-
seen the complex issues that would accompany
technological developments. Do you think the
Constitution is equipped to resolve the
technological issues of today?

Protecting News Sources Many reporters
argue they have the right to refuse to testify in order
to protect confidential information and its source.
But what if a reporter has information the defense
or the government needs to prove its case? Can re-
porters refuse to surrender evidence? In three cases
considered together in 1972, the Supreme Court
said that reporters do not have such a right. The
Court ruled the First Amendment does not give spe-
cial  privileges  to  news  reporters. Reporters, the
Court said, “like other citizens, [must] respond to
relevant questions put to them in the course of a
valid grand jury investigation or criminal trial.” The
Court  added  that  any  special  exemptions  must
come from Congress and the states.

374 CHAPTER 13: CONSTITUTIONAL FREEDOMS

To date, 30 states have passed shield laws—
laws that give reporters some means of protection
against being forced to disclose confidential infor-
mation or sources in state courts.

Free Press Issues

In  writing  the  First  Amendment,
the
Founders thought of the press as printed ma-
terial—newspapers, books, and pamphlets. They
could not foresee the growth of technology that has
created new instruments of mass communication—
and new issues regarding freedom of the press.
Radio  and  Television Because  radio  and
broadcast television use public airwaves, they do
not enjoy as much freedom as other press media.
Stations must obtain a license from the Federal
Communications Commission (FCC), a govern-
ment agency that regulates their actions.

Although Congress has denied the FCC the
right to censor programs before they are broad-
cast, the FCC can require that stations observe cer-
tain standards. In addition, it may punish stations
that broadcast obscene or indecent language.

The growth of cable television has raised new
questions. For  example, to  what  extent  do  free
speech  guidelines  apply  to  cable  television? 
In Turner Broadcasting System, Inc. v. FCC 1 (1997)
the  Court  ruled  that  cable  television  opera-
tors should have more First Amendment protec-
tion  from  government  regulation  than  other 
broadcasters, but not as much as the publishers 
of newspapers and magazines. Cable operators, the
Court  said, are  not  entitled  to  maximum  First
Amendment protections because typically only one
cable operator controls the video programming
market in most communities.

Then in 2000, the Court struck down the part
of the  Telecommunications  Act  of 1996  that 
required  cable  television  operators  to  block  or
limit transmission of sexually oriented programs
to  protect  young  viewers. In  United  States v.
Playboy ,2 the Court decided that the cable opera-
tors’ First  Amendment  rights  were  violated 
because the law was too restrictive.

See the following footnoted materials in the Reference Handbook:
1. Turner Broadcasting System, Inc. v. FCC case 

summary, page 766. 

2. United States v. Playboy case summary, page 767. 

Motion Pictures In Burstyn v. Wilson 1 (1952)
the Court held that “liberty of expression by means
of motion pictures is guaranteed by the First and
Fourteenth  amendments.” The  Court  has  also
ruled, however, that movies may be treated differ-
ently than books or newspapers.
E-Mail and the Internet The Supreme Court
has always given the highest level of free speech
protection to print media. In Reno v. American
Civil Liberties Union 2 (1997), the Court ruled that
speech on the Internet was closer to print media
than to broadcast media. It determined, therefore,
that Internet speech deserves the same level of First
Amendment protection. In the Reno decision, the
Court  declared  unconstitutional  a  federal  law
against sending pornographic material online in a
way available to children. The Court agreed that
protecting children was important, but said, “The
interest in encouraging freedom of expression in a
democratic society outweighs any theoretical but
unproven benefit of censorship.”
Obscenity The Supreme Court and most other
courts have supported the principle that society
has the right to protection from obscene speech,
pictures, and  written  material. After  many  at-
tempts to define obscenity, the Court finally ruled
in Miller v. California 3 (1973) that, in effect, local
communities should set their own standards for
obscenity. In the Miller ruling the Court stated:

sound to read the First Amendment as 
requiring that the people of Maine or 
Mississippi accept . . . conduct found 

“It is neither realistic nor constitutionally
tolerable in Las Vegas or New York.”

Since the Miller decision, however, the Court
has stepped in to overrule specific acts by local au-
thorities, making it clear there are limits on the
right of communities to censor.
Advertising Advertising is considered “com-
mercial  speech”—speech  that  has  a  profit  mo-
tive—and is given less protection under the First
Amendment than purely political speech. In fact,
advertisers have long faced strong government reg-
ulation and control. In the mid-1970s, however,
the  Supreme  Court  began  to  relax  controls. In
Bigelow v. Virginia 4 (1975) the justices permitted
newspaper  advertisements  for  abortion  clinics.
Since then the Court has voided laws that ban ad-
vertising  medical  prescription  prices, legal  ser-
vices, and  medical  services. It  has  also  limited
regulation  of billboards, “for  sale” signs, and
lawyers’ advertisements.

See the following footnoted materials in the Reference Handbook:
1. Burstyn v. Wilson case summary, page 756. 
2. Reno v. American Civil Liberties Union case summary, 

page 764. 

3. Miller v. California case summary, page 761. 
4. Bigelow v. Virginia case summary, page 755. 

Section  4 Assessment
Section  4 Assessment

Checking for Understanding
1. Main Idea Use a graphic organizer like the one

shown to analyze the importance of the Supreme
Court’s ruling 
on the Com-
munications
Decency Act.

Communications Decency Act
Issue at Stake
Court’s Ruling

2. Define prior restraint, sequester, gag order,

shield laws.

3. Identify Federal Communications Commission.
4. When can the government exercise prior 

restraint on the press?

5. What measures may a court take to restrain
press coverage in the interest of a fair trial?

Critical Thinking
6. Checking Consistency Are there any circum-
stances under which reporters should be re-
quired to reveal or protect their confidential
information or sources? Explain your answer.

Civil Liberties The issue of freedom of the
press traces back to the New York v. John
Peter Zenger case. Research this case and
explain how the results of this case relate to
freedom of the press issues today. Present
your findings in a comparison chart.

CHAPTER 13: CONSTITUTIONAL FREEDOMS 375

S e c t i on   5
S e c t i on   5

Freedom of Assembly

Reader’s Guide

Key Terms
picketing, Holocaust, heckler’s veto
Find Out
■ What are the limits on public assembly?
■ What constitutional protections are applied to

demonstrations by unpopular groups, or to
those who might incite violence? 

Understanding Concepts
Civil Liberties Why is freedom of assembly 
subject to greater regulation than freedom 
of speech?

Mall Bans Teens

Mall of America logo

BLOOMINGTON, MINNESOTA, SEPTEMBER 20, 1996
America’s 

largest
mall  today  be-
came  one  of the  na-
tion’s  first  to  restrict
teenagers. The Mall of
America  has  barred
shoppers  under  age
16 on weekend nights
unless they are with a parent or another adult who is
older  than  21. Mall  officials  accuse  the  teenagers  of
disturbing  other  shoppers. On  some  Saturday
nights, 3,000 teens flood the mall, which they say is
the coolest spot in the Twin Cities. Those interviewed
say they will not be caught dead in the mall with their
parents. The American Civil Liberties Union, which
condemns the ban, will not challenge it, noting previ-
ous federal court rulings that First Amendment rights
do not apply inside shopping malls.

376 CHAPTER 13: CONSTITUTIONAL FREEDOMS

The First Amendment may not guarantee

teenagers the right to gather in a shop-
ping mall, but it does guarantee “the right
of the people peaceably to assemble, and
to petition the Government for a redress of griev-
ances.” Freedom of assembly applies not only to
meetings  in  private  homes  but  also  to  those  in
public places. It protects the right to make views
known  to  public  officials  and  others  by  such
means as petitions, letters, lobbying, carrying signs
in a parade, or marching.

Protecting Freedom 
of Assembly

Freedom  of assembly  is  a  right  closely 
related to freedom of speech because most
gatherings, no matter how large or small, involve
some form of protected speech. Without this basic
freedom, there would be no political parties and
no  interest  groups  to  influence  the  actions  of
government.

DeJonge v. Oregon One  of the  Supreme
Court’s first major decisions on freedom of as-
sembly came in 1937 in the case of DeJonge v.
Oregon. Dirk DeJonge was convicted for con-
ducting  a  public  meeting  sponsored  by  the
Communist Party. He claimed he was innocent
because he had not advocated any criminal be-
havior but had merely discussed issues of pub-
lic concern. In voting unanimously to overturn
DeJonge’s conviction, the Court ruled Oregon’s
law  unconstitutional. Chief Justice  Charles
Evans  Hughes  wrote  that  under  the  First
Amendment “peaceable  assembly  for  lawful
discussion cannot be made a crime.”

The  DeJonge case  established  two  legal
principles. The  Court  determined  that  the

right of assembly was as important as the rights of
free speech and free press. Also, the Court ruled
that  the  due  process  clause  of the  Fourteenth
Amendment protects freedom of assembly from
state and local governments.
Assembly on Public Property Freedom of
assembly includes the right to parade and demon-
strate in public. Because these forms of assembly
usually occur in parks, streets, or on sidewalks, it
is very possible they could interfere with the rights
of others to use the same facilities. Conflicts also
arise when parades and demonstrations advocate
unpopular causes. Demonstrations, in particular,
have a high potential for violence because others,
holding conflicting beliefs, often launch counter-
demonstrations. The  two  sides  may  engage  in
heated verbal, and sometimes physical, clashes.
For  such  reasons, parades  and  demonstrations
generally are subject to greater government regu-
lation  than  exercises  of pure  speech  and  other
kinds of assembly.
Limits on Parades and Demonstrations
To provide for public order and safety, many states
and cities require that groups wanting to parade or
demonstrate first obtain a permit. The precedent
for such regulation was set in Cox v. New Hamp-
shire 1 (1941). Cox was one of several Jehovah’s
Witnesses convicted of violating a law requiring a
parade permit. He challenged his conviction on
the  grounds  that  the  permit  law  restricted  his
rights of free speech and assembly.

The Court voted to uphold the law, ruling that
the  law  was  not  designed  to  silence  unpopular
ideas. Rather, the law was intended to ensure that
parades would not interfere with other citizens
using the streets. In part, the decision said:

regulations in order to assure the safety
and convenience of the people in the use of
public highways has never been regarded

“The authority of a municipality to impose
as inconsistent with civil liberties.”

—Chief Justice Charles Evans Hughes, 1941
Additional Limits on Public Assembly
Other public facilities such as airports, libraries,
courthouses, schools, and  swimming  pools  also
may be used for public demonstrations. Here again,

Freedom to Assemble

First Amendment Rights Demonstrators use
their right to assemble, rallying against old-growth
logging in California. Why is the right to assem-
ble fundamental to democracy?

however, the Court has set limits. For example, in
Adderly v. Florida 2 (1966)  the  Court  held  that
demonstrators could not enter the grounds of a
county jail without permission. The Court ruled
that, while the jail was public property, it was not
generally open to public access. The state has the
power, the Court reasoned,“to preserve the proper-
ty under its control for the use to which it is lawful-
ly dedicated.”

Other restrictions on peaceable public assem-
bly occur when the right of assembly clashes with
the rights of other people. In Cox v. Louisiana 3
(1965)  the  Court  upheld  a  law  that  banned
demonstrations and parades near courthouses if

See the following footnoted materials in the Reference Handbook:
1. Cox v. New Hampshire case summary, page 756. 
2. Adderly v. Florida case summary, page 754. 
3. Cox v. Louisiana case summary, page 756. 

CHAPTER 13: CONSTITUTIONAL FREEDOMS 377

How to Find a Supreme 
Court Decision

Supreme Court gavel

Alaw library or even the library

in your local courthouse may
have more than a thousand vol-
umes containing law cases. How can
you find information about a particular Supreme Court
case? If you know the parties in a case, you can look in a
“Digest” of cases. If you look up “Olmstead” for exam-
ple, you will find “Olmstead v. United States, 277 U.S.
438.” This means that the report of the Olmstead deci-
sion begins on page 438 of volume 277 of the 
United States Reports. These reports are published by
the Government Printing Office several times each year
and date back to the very first year of the Court’s history.
Possibly an easier way to locate a case is by using the 
Internet. A federal government home page will allow you
to choose a Supreme Court Web site. From there it is
simple to locate cases if you know the parties or even
the approximate year the case was decided.

articipating
articipating

I N   G O V E R N M E N T  
I N   G O V E R N M E N T  

A C T I V I T Y
A C T I V I T Y

Research a Case Choose an interesting case from this
chapter and research it. Take notes and prepare to share
what you find with the class.

Assembly  and  Property
Rights The  right  to  assemble
does not allow a group to convert
private property to its own use, even
if the property is open to the public.
In  Lloyd  Corporation v. Tanner 3
(1972) the Court ruled that a group
protesting the Vietnam War did not
have the right to gather in a shop-
ping mall.

In recent years some right-to-
life groups demonstrating outside
private abortion clinics blocked the
entrances. The Court appeared un-
willing to protect this type of as-
sembly. In New York State NOW v.
Terry (1990) and Hirsch v. Atlanta
(1990), the justices refused to hear
appeals  of bans  on  such  demon-
strations. In  1993, however, the
Court ruled that an 1871 civil rights
law  could  not  be  applied  against
these demonstrators. In the 1997
case of Schenck v. Pro-Choice Net-
work  of Western  New  York,4 the
Court upheld parts of an injunc-
tion that created a fixed buffer zone
around  abortion  clinics. At  the
same time the Court struck down
“floating  buffer  zone” laws  that 
attempted  to  keep  a  few  feet  of
distance between a demonstrator
and a moving person who may be
approaching a clinic.

they could interfere with trials. In Grayned v. City
of Rockford 1 (1972) the justices upheld a ban on
demonstrations near schools that were intended to
disrupt classes.

Other Supreme Court decisions, however, re-
quire that restrictions on freedom of assembly be
precisely worded and apply evenly to all groups. In
Police Department of Chicago v. Mosley 2 (1972),
the Court voided a city law that banned all demon-
strations near school buildings except in the case
of picketing—patrolling an establishment to con-
vince workers and the public not to enter it—by
labor unions.

378 CHAPTER 13: CONSTITUTIONAL FREEDOMS

Public Assembly and Disorder
A basic principle of democracy is that peo-
ple have the right to assemble regardless of
the views they hold. Police, however, sometimes
have difficulty protecting this principle when pub-
lic assemblies threaten public safety.

See the following footnoted materials in the Reference Handbook:
1. Grayned v. City of Rockford case summary, page 759. 
2. Police Department of Chicago v. Mosley case summary, 

page 763. 

3. Lloyd Corporation v. Tanner case summary, page 761. 
4. Schenck v. Pro-Choice Network of Western New York 

case summary, page 765. 

also  urged  African  Americans  to  fight  for  civil
rights. As Feiner spoke, a larger and larger crowd
gathered. When the crowd grew hostile, someone
called the police. When two officers arrived to in-
vestigate, an angry man in the audience told them
that if they did not stop Feiner, he would. The po-
lice asked Feiner to stop speaking. When Feiner re-
fused, the  police  arrested  him, and  he  was
convicted of disturbing the peace.

The Supreme Court upheld Feiner’s convic-
tion, ruling that the police had not acted to sup-
press speech but to preserve public order. Chief

Demonstrating for Civil Liberties

The Nazis in Skokie In 1977 the American
Nazi Party, a small group patterned after Adolf
Hitler’s German Nazi Party, announced plans to
hold a rally in Skokie, Illinois, a largely Jewish sub-
urb of Chicago. Skokie residents were outraged.
Many were survivors of the Holocaust, the mass
extermination of Jews and other groups by the
Nazis during World War II. Others were relatives of
the 6 million Jews killed in the Nazi death camps.
Skokie officials, citizens, and many others ar-
gued  that  the  Nazis  should  not  be  allowed  to
march. They claimed that the march would cause
great  pain  to  residents  and  would 
attract a counter-demonstration.

To prevent the march, the city re-
quired  the  Nazis  to  post  a  $300,000
bond  to  get  a  parade  permit. The 
Nazis claimed the high bond interfered
with their freedoms of speech and as-
sembly. A federal appeals court ruled
that no community could use parade
permits  to  interfere  with  free  speech
and assembly.

The  Skokie  case  illustrates  a  free
speech  and  assembly  problem  some
scholars have called the heckler’s veto.
The public vetoes the free speech and as-
sembly rights of unpopular groups by
claiming demonstrations will result in
violence. Such claims may be effective
because  government  officials  will  al-
most always find it easier to curb un-
popular  demonstrations  than  to  take
measures to prevent violence.

This dilemma leads to two related
questions. Does the Constitution require
the police to protect unpopular groups
when their demonstrations incite vio-
lence? May the police order demonstra-
tors to disperse in the interest of public
peace and safety?

Feiner v.  New  York In  1950,
speaking  on  a  sidewalk  in  Syracuse,
New  York, Irving  Feiner  verbally  at-
tacked President Truman, the American
Legion, and the mayor of Syracuse. He

Freedom of Assembly Randy Wegerski, a 4-year-old Tus-
carora Native American, joins a picket line in 1958. The pro-
testors gathered to block a state survey of reservation land
that had been seized for a power project. Do you think
government officials should be able to limit demonstra-
tions that interfere in government work?

CHAPTER 13: CONSTITUTIONAL FREEDOMS 379

Demonstrators and Police Clash

Voices of Protest As a wave of civil rights activity swept
across the nation in the 1960s, some government officials and
police attempted to preserve laws that held segregation in place
by attempting to restrict demonstrations. Police in Birmingham,
Alabama, used high-pressure water hoses against marchers in
the spring of 1963. Why do you think police presence was
so great during the civil rights protests of the 1960s?

the city hall in downtown Chicago
to the mayor’s home. Calling city
hall a “snake pit” and the mayor
“the  snake,” the  demonstrators
began parading around the block
demanding  the  ouster  of
the
school superintendent for failing
to desegregate schools. About 180
police  officers  were  on  hand  to
provide protection.

A crowd of 1,000 or more hos-
tile onlookers from the all-white
neighborhood  gathered. They
began to heckle and throw rocks
and eggs at the marchers.

At  8:30  in  the  evening, the
marchers  stopped  singing  and
chanting and paraded quietly. The
crowd continued to heckle them.
By 9:30 the police concluded that
violence  was  imminent  and  or-
dered  the  demonstrators  to  dis-
perse. When  Gregory  and  the
others refused, they were arrested.
Five, including Gregory, were later
convicted of disorderly conduct.

Justice Fred M. Vinson spoke for the majority of
the Court. He wrote:

“It is one thing to say that the police cannot

be used as an instrument for the suppres-
sion of unpopular views, and another to
say that, when as here the speaker passes
the bounds of argument and undertakes
incitement to riot, they are powerless to

prevent a breach of the peace.”

—Chief Justice Fred M. Vinson, 1951
Gregory v. City of Chicago The Feiner case
stands as a precedent that the police may disperse a
demonstration in order to keep the peace. Since then,
however, the Court has overturned the convictions
of people whose only offense has been to demon-
strate peacefully in support of unpopular causes.
The case of Gregory v. City of Chicago (1969) is a
good example of the Court’s thinking on this matter.
Dick  Gregory, an  entertainer  and  African
American activist, led a group of marchers from

380 CHAPTER 13: CONSTITUTIONAL FREEDOMS

In a departure from the Feiner
case, the  Supreme  Court  over-
turned  the  conviction  of Gregory  and  the
marchers. The Court ruled that the demonstrators
had been peaceful and had done no more than 
exercise their First Amendment right of assembly
and  petition. Neighborhood  residents, not  the
marchers, had  caused  the  disorder. The  Court 
concluded  that  such  a  march, “if peaceful  and 
orderly, falls  well  within  the  sphere  of conduct 
protected by the First Amendment.”

Protection for 
Labor Picketing

Workers on strike or other demonstrators
often organize picket lines. For many years
the Supreme Court has debated how much protec-
tion the First Amendment gives picketers. Picket-
ing conveys a message and is therefore a form of
speech and assembly. But labor picketing, unlike
most other kinds of demonstrations, tries to per-
suade customers and workers not to deal with a

business. Many people will not cross a picket
line, depriving a business of its workers and
customers.

Through much of American history, courts
have  supported  many  kinds  of restraints  on
labor picketing. Then, in Thornhill v. Alabama 1
(1940), the Supreme Court ruled that peaceful
picketing was a form of free speech. It reflected
the growing strength of the labor movement in
American life.

In later decisions, however, the Court
severely  limited  the  position  it  took  in
Thornhill. In Hughes v. Superior Court 2
(1950) the Court refused to overturn a
California court’s ban on picketing at a
supermarket  to  force  it  to  hire African
American workers. The Court wrote:

See the following footnoted materials in the
Reference Handbook:
1. Thornhill v. Alabama case summary, 

page 766. 

2. Hughes v. Superior Court case summary, 

page 759. 

“While picketing is a

mode of communication,
it is inseparably some-
thing more and different.
. . . The very purpose of a
picket line is to exert in-
fluences, and it produces
consequences, different
from other modes of

communication.”—Justice Felix 

Frankfurter,
1950

The Court further limited picket-
ing  in  International  Brotherhood  of

This and other protestors
demonstrated during the 
August 1997 Teamsters–UPS
labor dispute which crippled
the nation for 15 days.

Making a Difference In 1996 Gladiola Campos

joined 1,000 other college stu-
dents and activists in a pro-

Making a Difference
Gladiola Campos

Union Summer logo

gram called Union Summer. The
program, which was sponsored
by the AFL-CIO, was designed to
strengthen the nation’s labor
movement by encouraging people
to join unions and protest unfair
labor practices. It was modeled
after Freedom Summer, a similar
program in 1964 in which stu-
dents were bussed across the
South to register African Ameri-
can voters. 

Union Summer participants

were paid $210 a week and trav-
eled to various parts of the coun-
try to help draw attention to
unfair labor practices. Students
helped sewage-plant employees
protesting in Denver, put pres-
sure on a Washington store to
stop selling clothing made in
sweatshops, and picketed hotels

in South Carolina for their unfair
labor practices.

Campos, a University of Texas
student, was sent to Los Angeles.
One of her projects was distribut-
ing leaflets outside a hotel to urge
people to boycott the establish-
ment. The owners of the hotel had
been blocking their employees’ ef-
forts to organize a union for three
years. Many of the employees
were Hispanic immigrants.

The union issue hits close to
home with Campos. Her mother
was a maintenance worker when
she was growing up in El Paso,
Texas. Before the hospital where
her mother worked was union-
ized, Campos said her mother
“had to work two jobs, and we
couldn’t afford health insurance.”
Campos thinks her summer expe-
rience was worthwhile. “I’m final-
ly doing something instead of just
talking,” she said.

CHAPTER 13: CONSTITUTIONAL FREEDOMS 381

Teamsters, Local 695 v. Vogt 1 (1957). The Court
upheld a Wisconsin law that prohibited picketing a
business unless there was a labor dispute.

Freedom of Association

Does the First Amendment protect an indi-
vidual’s right to join an organization that
the  government  considers  subversive?  In  the 
DeJonge v. Oregon 2 (1937)  case, the  Supreme
Court  extended  the  right  to  freely  assemble  to 
protect  the  right  of individuals  to  freedom  of
association—to  join  a  political  party, interest
group, or other organization. Can the government
restrict the right of assembly and association to
protect national security?

Whitney v. California In 1927 the Supreme
Court reviewed the case of Charlotte Anita Whit-
ney, who  had  attended  a  convention  where  the
Communist Labor Party was organized. Because the
party advocated workers using violent means to
take over control of property, Whitney was convict-
ed of breaking a California law concerning violent
actions. The prosecution successfully argued that
membership in the party indicated that she had
committed a crime. In Whitney v. California (1927)
the Supreme Court decided that:

“Although the rights of free speech and as-

sembly are fundamental, they are not ab-
solute. Their exercise is subject to their
restriction, if the particular restriction pro-
posed is required in order to protect the state
from destruction. . . . The necessity which is
essential to a valid restriction does not exist
unless speech would produce, or is intended
to produce, a clear and imminent danger of
some substantive evil which the state consti-

tutionally may seek to prevent.”

—Justice Louis Brandeis, 1927

The clear and present danger doctrine later
became a major issue when the government began
to arrest and convict accused subversives, primari-
ly Communist Party members during the 1950s.
The Alien Registration Act of 1940, known as the
Smith  Act, contained  a  section  that  made  ad-
vocating forcible overthrow of any government in
the United States illegal. The Supreme Court up-
held convictions of 11 leaders of the American
Communist Party under this act in Dennis v. Unit-
ed States 3 (1951). In later cases, however, the Court
ruled that only actual preparations for the use of
force against the government were punishable.

See the following footnoted materials in the Reference Handbook:
1. International Brotherhood of Teamsters, Local 695

v. Vogt case summary, page 760. 

2. DeJonge v. Oregon case summary, page 757. 
3. Dennis v. United States case summary, page 757. 

Section  5 Assessment
Section  5 Assessment

Section  5  Rev iew
Section  5  Rev iew

Critical Thinking
5. Checking Consistency Should more restrictions
apply if a parade supports an unpopular cause?
Support your answer.

Checking for Understanding
1. Main Idea Use a graphic organizer like the one

below to identify two reasons the right to assem-
ble is important to preserve in a democracy and
two reasons it can be limited.

To Preserve

To Limit

2. Define picketing, Holocaust, heckler's veto.
3. Identify clear and present danger doctrine.
4. What two principles were established by the 

DeJonge decision?

382 CHAPTER 13: CONSTITUTIONAL FREEDOMS

Civil Liberties Imagine that you are the mayor
of a town where a citizen is planning a rally 
to protest the government’s environmental
policies. Write a letter to the city council 
explaining the constitutional issues and the
public welfare concerns that they should 
consider before allowing the rally.

Using Library Resources

Your teacher has assigned a major research re-

port, so you go to the library. As you wander
the aisles surrounded by books on every

topic imaginable, you wonder: Where do I start
my research? Which reference works should I use?

Learning the Skill 

Libraries contain many reference works. Here

are brief descriptions of important reference
sources:

Reference Books Reference books include ency-
clopedias, biographical dictionaries, atlases, and
almanacs.

• An encyclopedia is a set of books containing

short articles on many subjects arranged 
alphabetically.

• A biographical dictionary includes brief bi-
ographies listed alphabetically by last names.
• An atlas is a collection of maps and charts
for locating geographic features and places.
An atlas can be general or thematic.

• An almanac is an annually updated reference
that provides current statistics and historical
information on a wide range of subjects.

Card Catalogs Every library has a card catalog,
either on cards or computer or both, which lists
every book in the library. Search for books by au-
thor, subject, or title. Computerized card catalogs
will also advise you on the book’s availability.

Periodical Guides A periodical guide is a set of
books listing topics covered in magazines and
newspaper articles.

Computer Databases Computer databases 
provide collections of information organized for
rapid search and retrieval. For example, many 
libraries carry reference materials on CD-ROM.

Accessing library resources

Practicing the Skill

Decide which sources described in this skill
you would use to answer each of these questions
for a report on constitutional freedoms.
1. During which years did Justice Hugo H. Black

serve on the Supreme Court?
2. What is the Equal Access Act?
3. How did the public react to the Tinker case?
4. Which films have been censored and why?

Application Activity
Application Activity

Application Activity
Application Activity

Using your library, research the follow-
ing: Is the Federal Communications Com-
mission involved with censorship? What
standards does it apply to radio and televi-
sion programs and why? Present the 
information you find to the class.

The Glencoe Skillbuilder
Interactive Workbook, Level 2
provides instruction and practice
in key social studies skills.

383

Chapter  13
Chapter  13

Assessment and Activities

GOVERNMENT

Self-Check Quiz Visit the United States Government:
Democracy in Action Web site at gov.glencoe.com and
click on Chapter 13–Self-Check Quizzes to prepare
for the chapter test.

Reviewing Key Terms
From the following list, choose the term that fits
each situation described.

shield laws
pure speech
prior restraint
libel

heckler’s veto
seditious speech
picketing
symbolic speech

The First Amendment Freedom of . . .

Religion

Speech

The establishment clause prevents Congress
from creating a state-sponsored religion.
The free exercise clause prevents the 
government from impeding the religious
beliefs of Americans—but not necessarily 
the way those beliefs are practiced.

Protected:        
• pure speech
• symbolic speech (in most cases)
Not protected: 
• seditious speech (treasonous speech)
• defamatory speech (slander and libel)
• “fighting words”

Press

A free press is invaluable in a democracy to
ensure that citizens remain well informed of
government actions. In general, the press is
regulated when reporting on matters of
national security or to ensure a fair trial.

Assembly The right of assembly is closely related to the

right of free speech. However, assembly in
public areas must usually be cleared with a
permit to ensure public safety.

1. Spectators threaten violence against an unpop-

ular demonstration and, in order to keep
peace, authorities break up the demonstration.
2. A government official tells a reporter that she
cannot publish a story that might compromise
national security.

3. A group burns an American flag to show its ob-

jection to a government policy.

4. A newspaper publishes an untrue story that
damages the reputation of a local resident.

5. Animal rights activists parade outside a store

that sells furs and attempt to convince cus-
tomers not to enter the establishment.

6. An individual urges a group to fight the police

rather than obey a police order to disperse.

7. A person stands in front of a group and states

her opinion on an issue.

8. A reporter is protected against being forced to

disclose a source of information in court.

Recalling Facts
1. List four freedoms the First Amendment protects.
2. List four examples of how religion remains part

of government.

3. Identify kinds of speech the First Amendment

protects and kinds it does not protect.

4. How might freedom of the press interfere with

an individual’s right to a fair trial?

5. Why may government require that groups first

obtain permits to parade or demonstrate?

Understanding Concepts 
1. Civic Participation Analyze the Supreme Court’s
decision in Gitlow v. New York. How did it sup-
port the intent of the Fourteenth Amendment
to define citizenship and civic participation?

2. Civil Liberties Why did the court treat a 

Minneapolis newspaper differently than a
Hazelwood school newspaper?

Critical Thinking
1. Demonstrating Reasoned Judgment Should the
First Amendment protect those who publish
stolen government documents? Explain.

2. Recognizing Ideologies The

Court ruled out laws 
requiring the teaching of
creationism, but not the
teaching of creationism 
itself. Does teaching 
creationism in public
schools serve to “endorse
a particular religious 
doctrine”? Explain.

3. Making Comparisons Use a
graphic organizer like the
one below to compare the
three tests for limiting
seditious speech.

Limits on Seditious Speech

relaxes limits sets standard toughens limits

Chapter  13
Chapter  13

Interpreting Political Cartoons Activity
1. Whom do 

you think the
person in the
cartoon is 
representing?
Why?

2. What is this

person doing?

3. What do his

thoughts 
suggest about
the nature of
an individual’s
constitutional
rights?

Analyzing Primary
Sources
Civil rights leader Malcolm X
advocated a more directly con-
frontational approach to acquir-
ing African American rights. In
this 1964 speech, he discussed how African Amer-
icans would gain their full constitutional right to
vote. Read the excerpt and answer the questions
that follow.

“If we don’t do something real soon, I think you’ll have

to agree that we’re going to be forced either to use the 
ballot or the bullet. It’s one or the other in 1964. It isn’t
that time is running out—time has run out! 1964 threatens
to be the most explosive year America has ever witnessed. . . .
We will work with anybody, anywhere, at any time, who
is genuinely interested in tackling the problem head-on,
nonviolently as long as the enemy is nonviolent, but
violent when the enemy gets violent.”

1. In this excerpt, is Malcolm X advocating the 
violent overthrow of the government? If so, 
is his right to say this protected by the 
constitutional right to free speech?

2. If Malcolm X’s speech had led to a violent 
uprising or attempt to overthrow the govern-
ment, would you consider him responsible?
Would the Court?

Applying Technology Skills
Using a Web Site Locate the Web site for 
the Journalism Education Association. Research
the association’s position on student press rights.
Summarize and discuss these rights with your
classmates.

Participating in 
State Government
Locate a copy of your state’s
constitution, particularly the
Bill of Rights. Compare the
rights guaranteed in the First
Amendment of the U.S. Constitution
with the rights protected by your state’s Bill of
Rights. Prepare a chart or graphic organizer that
identifies the similarities and the differences 
between the two documents.

CHAPTER 13: CONSTITUTIONAL FREEDOMS 385

